#This file was created by <vineyard> Wed Jul  5 10:07:06 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Acceleration of Gravity
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objective
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

To determine the acceleration of gravity near the surface of the earth.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Overview 
\layout Standard

In a previous activity, you performed a video analysis of an object in free
 fall to determine the equation of motion and to extract a value for the
 acceleration of gravity near the surface of the earth.
 Now we will make a more accurate determination of the acceleration of gravity
 by timing the motion of a freely falling object.
 The "picket fence" has evenly spaced black bars on a piece of clear plastic.
 When dropped through the photogate, the bars interrupt the light beam.
 By measuring the distance between the bars, and using the time measurements
 of the photogate, the acceleration of the freely falling picket fence can
 be calculated.
 
\layout Standard

Apparatus 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
Science Workshop 750 Interface
\layout Itemize

Photogate 
\layout Itemize

Picket fence 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
DataStudio
\shape default 
 software (Free Fall application)
\layout Standard

Note: On using the "Picket Fence" 
\layout Enumerate

When performing free-fall experiments, place a box with packing material
 under the experiment to cushion the fall of the picket fence.
\layout Enumerate

For accurate results drop the picket fence through the photogate vertically.
\layout Enumerate

To achieve vertical alignment of the picket fence hold it between your thumb
 and forefinger, centered at the top of the bar, before releasing.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Position and Velocity Graphs
\layout Standard

(a) Consider an object in free fall near the surface of the earth.
 Sketch your predictions for the position vs.
 time and velocity vs.
 time graphs of the motion of the object using dashed lines on the axes
 below.
 Assume that the positive position axis is down.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 224 215
file acceleration_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(b) Test your predictions by measuring the free fall of the picket fence.
 Open the Free Fall application.
 Have one person hold the picket fence in a vertical position above the
 gap between the arms of the photogate.
 Have another person start recording data and then have the first person
 drop the picket fence through the photogate.
 
\series bold 
Stop
\series default 
 the recording once the picket fence has passed completely through the photogate.
 The computer will display graphs of position versus time and velocity versus
 time.
 Sketch the results on the above axes using solid lines.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) How do your predictions compare with the results of the measurements?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) What can you say about the magnitude and sign of the acceleration in
 this case?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Determining the Acceleration of Gravity 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 50mm 
(a) Fit the velocity vs.
 time graph to determine the acceleration.
 Repeat this procedure to get a total of 20 good runs and record your results
 in a data table below.
 For one of the runs, print the graph window and put a copy in your notebook
 at the end of this unit.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Use Cricket Graph to find the mean and standard deviation for the accelerati
on measurements and record the results below in the form g = Mean ± 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Compare your average acceleration with the standard value of 9.80 m/s
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{2} \)
\end_inset 

.
 This is done by calculating the % difference.
 The % difference is calculated by subtracting the accepted value from your
 value, dividing by the accepted value and multiplying by 100.
\layout Standard

(d) Does your mean acceleration fall within one standard deviation of the
 accepted value? Is there any indication of a systematic error? Explain.
\the_end
