#This file was created by <vineyard> Fri Jul  7 16:17:13 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Centripetal Force
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material have been modified locally and may not have been
 classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objective
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

To explore the phenomenon of uniform circular motion and the accelerations
 and forces needed to maintain it.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Overview
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

In a previous unit you began the study of the application of Newton's laws
 to projectile motion.
 In this unit we are going to consider the application of Newton's laws
 to another phenomenon in two dimensions.
 Since Newton's laws can be used to predict types of motion or the conditions
 for no motion, their applications are useful in many endeavors including
 human body motion, astrophysics, and engineering.
\layout Standard

You will explore uniform circular motion, in which an object moves at a
 constant speed in a circle.
 In particular, you will develop a mathematical description of centripetal
 acceleration and the force needed to keep an object moving in a circle.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 132 134
file centripetal_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\layout Itemize

An airplane.
 
\layout Itemize

A video analysis system (Adobe Premier and VideoPoint).
 
\layout Itemize

A spring scale.
 Graphing software (CricketGraph).
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Moving in a Circle at a Constant Speed 
\layout Standard

When a race car speeds around a circular track, or when David twirled a
 stone at the end of a rope to clobber Goliath, or when a planet like Venus
 orbits the sun, they undergo uniform circular motion.
 Understanding the forces which govern orbital motion has been vital to
 astronomers in their quest to understand the laws of gravitation.
 
\layout Standard

But we are getting ahead of ourselves, for as we have done in the case of
 linear and projectile motion we will begin our study by considering situations
 involving external applied forces that lead to circular motion in the absence
 of friction.
 We will then use our belief in Newton's laws to see how the circular motions
 of the planets can be used to help astronomers discover the laws of gravitation.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 347 52
file centripetal_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Let's begin our study with some very simple considerations.
 Suppose an astronaut goes into outer space, ties a ball to the end of a
 rope, and spins the ball so that it moves at a constant speed.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Uniform Circular Motion 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Consider the figure above.
 What is the speed of a ball that moves in a circle of radius r = 2.5 m if
 it takes 0.50 s to complete one revolution?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) The speed of the ball is constant! Would you say that this is accelerated
 motion?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) What is the definition of acceleration? (Remember that acceleration
 is a vector!)
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Are velocity and speed the same thing? Is the velocity of the ball constant?
 (Hint: Velocity is a vector quantity!)
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) In light of your answers to (c) and (d), would you like to change your
 answer to part (b)? Explain.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Using Vectors to Diagram How Velocity Changes
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

By now you should have concluded that since the direction of the motion
 of an object undergoing uniform circular motion is constantly changing,
 its velocity is also changing and thus it is accelerating.
 We would like you to figure out how to calculate the direction of the accelerat
ion and its magnitude as a function of the speed v of an object such as
 a ball as it revolves and as a function of the radius of the circle in
 which it revolves.
 In order to use vectors to find the direction of velocity change in circular
 motion, let's review some rules for adding velocity vectors.
\layout Standard

Figure 3: 1.
 To Draw Velocities: Draw an arrow representing the velocity, v1, of the
 object at time t1.
 Draw another arrow representing the velocity, v2, of the object at time
 t2.
 2.
 To Draw Velocity Change: Find the change in the velocity Dv = v2 - v1 during
 the time interval t = t2 t1.
 Start by using the rules of vector sums to rearrange the terms so that
 v1 + Dv = v2.
 Next place the tails of the two velocity vectors together halfway between
 the original and final location of the object.
 The change in velocity is the vector that points from the head of the first
 velocity vector to the head of the second velocity vector.
 3.
 To Draw Acceleration: The acceleration equals the velocity change Dv divided
 by the time interval t needed for the change.
 Thus, a is in the same direction as v but is a different length unless
 ( t = 1).
 Thus, even if you do not know the time interval, you can still determine
 the direction of the acceleration because it points in the same direction
 as v.
 
\layout Standard

The acceleration associated with uniform circular motion is known as centripetal
 acceleration.
 You will use the vector diagram technique to find its direction.
\layout Standard

Activity 2: The Direction of Centripetal Acceleration (a) Determine the
 direction of motion of the ball shown below if it is moving counter-clockwise
 at a constant speed.
 Note that the direction of the ball's velocity is always tangential to
 the circle as it moves around.
 Draw an arrow representing the direction and magnitude of the ball's velocity
 as it passes the dot just before it reaches point A.
 Label this vector v1.
\layout Standard

(b) Next, use the same diagram to draw the arrow representing the velocity
 of the ball when it is at the dot just after it passes point A.
 Label this vector v2.
\layout Standard

(c) Find the direction and magnitude of the change in velocity as follows.
 In the space below, make an exact copy of both vectors, placing the tails
 of the two vectors together.
 (See Figure 2, diagram 2.) Next, draw the vector that must be added to vector
 v1 to add up to vector v2 ; label this vector Dv.
 Be sure that vectors v1 and v2 have the same magnitude and direction in
 this drawing that they had in your drawing in part (a)! (Again, see Figure
 2.)
\layout Standard

(d) Now, draw an exact copy of Dv on your sketch in part (a).
 Place the tail of this copy at point A.
 Again, make sure that your copy has the exact magnitude and direction as
 the original Dv in part (c).
\layout Standard

(e) Now that you know the direction of the change in velocity, what is the
 direction of the centripetal acceleration, ac?
\layout Standard

(f) If you redid the analysis for point B at the opposite end of the circle,
 what do you think the direction of the centripetal acceleration, ac, would
 be now?
\layout Standard

(g) As the ball moves on around the circle, what is the direction of its
 acceleration?
\layout Standard

(h) Use Newton's second law in vector form (SF = ma ) to describe the direction
 of the net force on the ball as it moves around the circle.
\layout Standard

(i) If the ball is being twirled around on a string, what is the source
 of the net force needed to keep it moving in a circle?
\layout Standard

Using Mathematics to Derive How Centripetal Acceleration Depends on Radius
 and Speed.
 You haven't done any experiments yet to see how centripetal acceleration
 depends on the radius of the circle and the speed of the object.
 You can use the rules of mathematics and the definition of acceleration
 to derive the relationship between speed, radius, and magnitude of centripetal
 acceleration.
\layout Standard

Activity 3: How Does ac Depend on v and r? (a) Do you expect you would need
 more centripetal acceleration or less centripetal acceleration to cause
 an object moving at a certain speed to rotate in a smaller circle? In other
 words, would the magnitude, ac, have to increase or decrease as r decreases
 if circular motion is to be maintained? Explain.
\layout Standard

(b) Do you expect you would need more centripetal acceleration or less centripet
al acceleration to cause an object to rotate at a given radius r if the
 speed v is increased? In other words, would the magnitude, ac, have to
 increase or decrease as v increases if circular motion is to be maintained?
 Explain.
\layout Standard

You should have guessed that it requires more acceleration to move an object
 of a certain speed in a circle of smaller radius and that it also takes
 more acceleration to move an object that has a higher speed in a circle
 of a given radius.
 Lets use the definition of acceleration in two-dimensions and some accepted
 mathematical relationships to show that the magnitude of centripetal accelerati
on should actually be given by the equation [Eq.
 1] In order to do this derivation you will want to use the following definition
 for acceleration [Eq.
 2]
\layout Standard

Activity 4: Finding the Equation for ac (a) Refer to the diagram below.
 Explain why, at the two points shown on the circle, the angle between the
 position vectors at times t1 and t2 is the same as the angle between the
 velocity vectors at times t1 and t2.
 Hint: In circular motion, velocity vectors are always perpendicular to
 their position vectors.
\layout Standard

(b) Since the angles are the same and since the magnitudes of the displacements
 never change (i.e., r= r1 = r2) and the magnitudes of the velocities never
 change (i.e., v = v1 = v2), use the properties of similar triangles to explain
 why .
\layout Standard

(c) Now use the equation in part (b) and the definition of < a > to show
 that 
\layout Standard

(d) The speed of the object as it rotates around the circle is given by
 .
 Is the change in arc length, s, larger or smaller than the magnitude of
 the change in the position vector, r? Explain why the arc length change
 and the change in the position vector are approximately the same when t
 is very small (so that the angle q becomes very small) i.e., why is s r?
\layout Standard

(e) If s r, then what is the equation for the speed in terms of r and t?
\layout Standard

(f) Using the equation in part (c), show that as t > 0, the instantaneous
 value of the centripetal acceleration is given by Eq.
 1.
\layout Standard

(g) If the object has a mass m, what is the equation for the magnitude of
 the centripetal force needed to keep the object rotating in a circle (in
 terms of v, r, and m)? In what direction does this force point as the object
 rotates in its circular orbit?
\layout Standard

Experimental Test of the Centripetal Force Equation The theoretical consideratio
ns in the last activity should have led you to the conclusion that, whenever
 you see an object of mass m moving in a circle of radius r at a constant
 speed v, it must at all times be experiencing a net centripetal force directed
 toward the center of the circle that has a magnitude of [Eq.
 3]
\layout Standard

Let's check this out.
 Does this rather odd equation really work for an external force?
\layout Standard

To test the validity of the derivation we must compare it to experience.
 We will use a "toy" airplane suspended from a string and flying in a circular
 path.
 We will use the video analysis system to measure the properties of the
 motion and determine the horizontal and vertical components of the force
 exerted on the airplane using Equation 3.
 We will compare that result with a direct measurement of the tension in
 the string.
 Activity 5: Verifying the Fc Equation (a) Measure the mass of the airplane
 and the length of the portion of the string that hangs below the horizontal
 post with the hole in it.
 Record the values below.
 
\layout Standard

m = R = (b) The airplane is suspended from a spring scale.
 The string should pass straight down from the scale through the small hole
 in the horizontal post.
 The camera should be placed about 1 meter above the airplane.
 Turn on the camera and center the spring scale in the frame by using the
 pendulum.
 Is the reading of the spring scale consistent with the mass of the airplane?
 Mount a ruler somewhere in the camera's field-of-view to serve as a scaling
 object.
 Launch the plane into uniform circular motion.
 When the motion is steady record a movie of at least one complete revolution
 and record the reading of the spring scale.
 See Appendix D: Video Analysis for details.
 Save the movie in a file entitled Centripetal.
\layout Standard

Fscale = 
\layout Standard

(c) Determine the position of the airplane during one complete revolution.
 To do this task follow the instructions in the second section of Appendix
 D: Video Analysis for recording and calibrating a data file entitled Centripeta
l Data.
 As you analyze the movie frame-by-frame, estimate to the nearest fraction
 of a frame the number of frames for one complete revolution.
 Record your result.
 When you calibrate the time and position data, note the number of frames
 per second of the movie and convert that number to the time interval between
 frames, Dt.
 What is the time interval for one complete revolution? Prepare your file
 for analysis by following the instructions in the last section of Appendix
 D.
 The file should contain three columns with the values of time, x-position,
 and y-position.
\layout Standard

Nframe = Dt = 
\layout Standard

trev = 
\layout Standard

(d) Make a graph of the trajectory of the airplane during one full revolution.
 See Appendix C: Introduction to Cricket Graph for details on using the
 graphing software.
 When you make your plot make sure the x and y axes cover the same size
 range otherwise you will distort the path of the airplane.
 Print your plot and attach it to your write-up.
\layout Standard

(1) Is the motion circular? What is your evidence?
\layout Standard

(2) What is the radius of the motion? 
\layout Standard

r =
\layout Standard

(f) To test the validity of the expression for Fc we must know the speed.
 Use the measurements of the radius of the airplane's trajectory and the
 time for one complete revolution to calculate the average speed.
\layout Standard

vave = 
\layout Standard

(g) Use your results for the mass, the average velocity of the airplane,
 and the radius of the circular motion to predict the centripetal force
 exerted by the string.
\layout Standard

Fc = 
\layout Standard

(h) We need one more piece of the puzzle to predict the tension in the string,
 namely, the vertical component of the force exerted on the airplane by
 the string.
 Recall that we know r, the radius of the airplane's circular path, and
 R, the total length of the string that is actually rotating.
 (1) Using these two distances (r and R) calculate the angle the string
 makes with the horizontal.
\layout Standard

q = 
\layout Standard

(2) We determined the horizontal component of the force on the airplane
 in part (g).
 Now with the angle q generate an expression for the vertical component
 exerted by the string and calculate it.
 Make a vector diagram of the different components.
 Generate an expression for the total force acting on the airplane due to
 the string and calculate the result.
\layout Standard

Fy = Fplane = 
\layout Standard

(i) Compare your result for Fstring with the measurement of the spring scale
 Fscale.
 Within experimental uncertainty, how well does your data support the hypothesis
 that Fc =mv2/r? 
\layout Standard

(j) Discuss the major sources of uncertainty in this experiment.
\the_end
