#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 10 14:36:38 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

To investigate the conditions under which mechanical energy is conserved.
 
\layout Itemize

To relate conservative and non-conservative forces to the net work done
 by a force when an object moves in a closed loop.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Is Mechanical Energy Conserved for a Sliding Object? 
\layout Standard

In the last two sessions you should have found that mechanical energy is
 conserved for a freely falling object.
 Let's investigate whether mechanical energy is conserved when an object
 slides down an inclined plane in the presence of a friction force.
\layout Standard

In this activity you will raise the incline just enough to allow the block
 to slide at a constant velocity (see the figure below).
 By measuring the velocity you can determine if mechanical energy is conserved.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 170 80
file conservative_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

Wooden block with hook 
\layout Itemize

Board to use as an incline S
\layout Itemize

Spring scale 
\layout Itemize

Meter stick 
\layout Itemize

Variety of masses 
\layout Itemize

Triple-beam balance 
\layout Itemize

Stop watch
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Is Mechanical Energy Conserved for a Sliding Block? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Raise the incline until the block slides at a constant velocity once
 it is pushed gently to overcome the static friction force.
 What is the potential energy of the block at point A relative to the bottom
 of the ramp? Show your data and calculation.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) What is the velocity of the block as it travels down the incline? Show
 your data and calculation.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) What is the kinetic energy of the block at the bottom of the incline?
 Does it change as the block slides? Show your calculation.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) What is the potential energy change, U, of the block when it reaches
 point B? Explain.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(e) Assuming the initial kinetic energy (just after your starter shove)
 is the same as the final kinetic energy, what is the kinetic energy change,
 K, of the block when it reaches point B? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(f) Is mechanical energy conserved as a result of the sliding.
 Cite the evidence for your answer.
\layout Standard

As you examine the activities you just completed you should conclude that
 the conservation of mechanical energy will probably only hold in situations
 where there are no friction forces present.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Physicists have discovered that certain conservative forces such as gravitationa
l forces and spring forces do no total work on an object when it moves in
 a closed loop.
 Other forces involving friction are not conservative and hence the total
 work these forces do on an object moving in a closed loop is not zero.
 In this next activity you will try to determine the validity of this assertion.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 140 98
file conservative_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

It is not hard to see that a gravitational force does no net work when an
 object moves at a constant speed through a complete round trip.
 In the above figure, it takes negative external work to lower a mass from
 point a to point b, as the force of gravity takes care of the work.
 On the other hand, raising the mass from point b to point a requires positive
 external work to be done against the force of gravity, and thus the net
 work done by the gravitational force for the complete trip is zero.
 When a frictional force is present it always does net work on an object
 as it undergoes a round trip.
 For example, when a block slides from point a to point b on a horizontal
 surface, it takes work to overcome the frictional force that opposes the
 motion.
 When the block slides back from point b to point a, the frictional force
 still opposes the motion of the block so that net work is done.
 Let's make this idea more concrete by sliding a block around a horizontal
 loop on your lab table in the presence of a frictional force and computing
 the work it does.
 Then you can raise and lower the block around a similar vertical loop and
 calculate the work the gravitational force does.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Are Frictional Forces Conservative According to the Loop Rule?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Put masses on the wooden block and use the spring scale to pull the
 block around a rectangular path on your table top at constant velocity.
 Draw arrows along the path for the direction of motion and the direction
 of the force you exert on the block.
 List the measured forces and distances for each of the four segments of
 the path to calculate the work you do around the entire path a to b to
 a as shown.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 254 86
file conservative_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_top 10mm \added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) What is the change in K as you progress around the loop?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Is the frictional force conservative or non-conservative (i.e.
 is the total work done by the friction force zero or non-zero)? Explain.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Is mechanical energy conserved? Explain.
 
\layout Standard

Let's return once again to our old friend the gravitational force and apply
 an external force to move the same block (without the masses) in a vertical
 loop above the table.
 Be very, very careful to pay attention to the direction of the gravitational
 force relative to the direction of the motion.
 Remember that work is the dot product of this force and the displacement
 in each case so that the work done by the gravitational force when the
 block moves up and when it moves down are not the same.
 What happens to the work when the gravitational force is perpendicular
 to the direction of motion, as is the case in moving from left to right
 and then later from right to left?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 320 174
file conservative_fig4.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Are G-Forces Conservative? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 40mm 
(a) Use the spring scale and raise and lower the wooden block around a rectangul
ar path above your tabletop at a constant speed without allowing it to slide
 at all.
 Draw arrows along the path for the direction of motion and the direction
 of the gravitational force exerted on the block.
 Use your measured distances, the measurement of the mass of the block and
 the dot product notation to calculate the work done by the gravitational
 force on the block over the entire path a to b to a as shown.
 Be careful not to let the block slide on the table or rub against it.
 Don't forget to specify the units! Hints: (1) In path 1 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

x = x
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

 - x
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0} \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

y = y
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

 - y
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0} \)
\end_inset 

 etc.
 (2) Keep track of the signs.
 For which paths is the work negative? Positive?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Is the gravitational force conservative or non-conservative according
 to the loop rule? Explain.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
The Conservation of "Missing" Energy
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

We have seen in the case of the sliding block that the Law of Conservation
 of Mechanical Energy does not seem to hold for forces involving friction.
 The question is, where does the "missing" energy 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

E go when frictional forces are present? All the energy in the system might
 not be potential energy or kinetic energy.
 If we are clever and keep adding new kinds of energy to our collection,
 we might be able to salvage a Law of Conservation of Energy.
 If we can, this law has the potential to be much more general and powerful
 than the Law of Conservation of Mechanical Energy.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: What Happens to the Missing Energy?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Rub the sliding block back and forth vigorously against your hand? What
 sensation do you feel?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) How might this sensation account for the missing energy?
\layout Standard

Physicists call the energy which is lost by a system as a result of work
 done against frictional forces thermal energy.
 This thermal energy may lead to an increase in the system's internal energy.
 Using the symbol E
\begin_inset Formula \( _{int} \)
\end_inset 

 to represent the change in internal energy of a system that experiences
 frictional forces allows us to express the Law of Conservation of Total
 Energy mathematically with the expression
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
E=U+K+\Delta E_{int}=constant\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

We are not prepared in this part of the course to consider the nature of
 internal energy or its actual measurement, so the Law of Conservation of
 Energy will for now remain an untested hypothesis.
 However, we will re-consider the concept of internal energy later in the
 course when we deal with heat and temperature.
\the_end
