#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 24 15:23:32 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Determining 
\latex latex 
$
\backslash 
pi$
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Determine the relationship between circumference and diameter 
\backslash 
item Understand the meaning of $
\backslash 
pi$
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus:
\layout Itemize

Wooden disks
\layout Itemize

Meter stick
\layout Itemize

String
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity:}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item With a meter stick, measure the diameter of one of the disks.
 Enter the value (or an average of several such measurements) in the table
 below.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item With a string and meter stick, measure the circumference of the same
 disk, and enter the value (or average of several measurements) in the table
 below.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Repeat the previous steps i.
 and ii.
 for each of the disks.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} 
\backslash 
begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|} 
\backslash 
hline disk & diameter (cm) & circumference (cm) 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline
\backslash 
hline 1 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 2 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 3 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 4 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 5 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
end{tabular} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Graph circumference versus diameter using your measurement data.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Fit data and determine the slope of the resulting line.
 
\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{10pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
slope 
\backslash 
rule{1.5in}{0.2pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{10pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Questions:}
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
1.
 What quantity is identified with the slope of the graph? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
2.
 Must the line go through the origin? Explain.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
3.If the diameter of the largest disk increased by a factor of 2.7, by how
 much would its circumference change? 
\layout Standard

4.
 If you formed a circle with a string 15 mm shorter than the circumference
 of the smallest disk, its diameter would be how much smaller than the disk's?
\the_end
