#This file was created by <vineyard> Wed Jul 12 17:20:16 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Impulse, Momentum, and Interactions
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives 
\layout Itemize

To verify the relationship between impulse and momentum experimentally.
 
\layout Itemize

To study the forces between objects that undergo collisions and other types
 of interactions in a short time period.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

Dynamics cart with flag and track 
\layout Itemize

Force transducer 
\layout Itemize

Photogate 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
Science Workshop 750 Interface
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
DataStudio
\shape default 
 software (Impulse-Momentum application)
\layout Standard


\series bold 
The Impulse-Momentum Theorem 
\layout Standard

Real collisions, like those between eggs and hands, a Nerfball and a wall,
 or a falling ball and a table top are tricky to study because t is so small
 and the collision forces are not really constant over the time the colliding
 objects are in contact.
 Thus, we cannot calculate the impulse as F t.
 Before we study more realistic collision processes, let's redo the theory
 for a variable force.
 In a collision, according to Newton's second law, the force exerted on
 a falling ball by the table top at any infinitesimally small instant in
 time is given by
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\overrightarrow{F}=\frac{d\overrightarrow{p}}{dt}\qquad [Eq.\: 1]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

To describe a general collision that takes place between an initial time
 t
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

 and a final time t
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

 , we must take the integral of both sides of the equation with respect
 to time.
 This gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\int _{t_{i}}^{t_{f}}\overrightarrow{F}dt=\int _{t_{i}}^{t_{f}}\frac{d\overrightarrow{p}}{dt}dt=\left( \overrightarrow{p_{f}}-\overrightarrow{p_{i}}\right) =\Delta \overrightarrow{p}\qquad [Eq.\: 2]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Impulse is a vector quantity defined by the equation
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\overrightarrow{I}=\int _{t_{i}}^{t_{f}}\overrightarrow{F}dt\qquad [Eq.\: 3]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

By combining equations [2] and [3] we can formulate the impulse-momentum
 theorem in which
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\overrightarrow{I}=\Delta \overrightarrow{p}\qquad [Eq.\: 4]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

If you are not used to mathematical integrals and how to solve them yet,
 don't panic.
 If you have a fairly smooth graph of how the force F varies as a function
 of time, the impulse integral can be calculated as the area under the F-t
 curve.
\layout Standard

Let's see qualitatively what an impulse curve might look like in a real
 collision in which the forces change over time during the collision.
 In particular, let's consider the collision of a Nerfball with a wall as
 shown below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 364 76
file impulse_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Predicting Collision Forces That Change 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Suppose a Nerfball is barreling toward a wall and collides with it.
 If friction is neglected, what is the net force exerted on the object just
 before it starts to collide?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) When will the magnitude of the force on the ball be a maximum? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(c) Roughly how long does the collision process take? Half a second? Less?
 Several seconds?
\layout Standard

(d) Attempt a rough sketch of the shape of the force the wall exerts on
 a moving object during a collision.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 196 120
file impulse_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Verification of the Impulse-Momentum Theorem
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

To verify the impulse-momentum theorem experimentally we must show that
 for an actual collision involving a single force on an object the equation
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\int _{t_{i}}^{t_{f}}\overrightarrow{F}dt=\Delta \overrightarrow{p}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

holds, where the impulse integral can be calculated by finding the area
 under the curve of a graph of F vs.
 t.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 183 107
file impulse_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

In this experiment you will investigate this theorem by measuring the impulse
 and the change in momentum of a cart undergoing a one-dimensional collision.
 The experimental setup is shown in the figure below.
 The end of the track with the motion detector should be raised about 1.5
 cm so that, when released, the cart will collide with the force probe.
 The force probe will measure the force as a function of time during the
 collision.
 The motion detector is used to measure the velocity of the glider before
 and after the collision.
 You will use the Impulse-Momentum application to make these measurements.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 535 90
file impulse_fig4.eps
width 3 90
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Verification of the Impulse-Momentum Theorem
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Measure and record the mass of the cart m.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 70mm 
(b) Construct a data table in the space below with the column headings Trial
 #, Area, v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

, and v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Make enough room to record 10 trials.
\layout Standard

(c) Open the Impulse-Momentum application from the Apple menu.
 Hold the cart about half-way up the track and press the TARE button on
 the force sensor.
 Start recording data and release the cart.
 Stop recording data after the cart collides with the force transducer and
 bounces back.
 The computer will then display graphs of velocity and force versus time.
\layout Standard

(d) Determine the area under the force vs.
 time graph and record the value in your data table.
 See 
\series bold 
Appendix B Introduction to DataStudio
\series default 
 for instructions on how to determine the area under a curve.
\layout Standard

(e) Use the smart tool to find the velocity just before the collision and
 the velocity just after the collision from the velocity versus time graph.
 Record these values in your data table.
\layout Standard

(f) Repeat parts (c) through (e) nine times.
 Be sure to press the TARE button on the force sensor before each run.
 Print the graphs for one of your trials.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 70mm 
(g) Construct another data table in the space below with the column headings
 Trial #, I, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

p, and % Diff.
 For each trial, calculate and record the impulse, I, and the change in
 momentum, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

p, in kg.m/s.
 Also, determine the % difference between the two for each trial.
 Also, show a sample calculation of I, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

p, and % Diff for one of your trials.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(h) Do your results verify the impulse-momentum theorem within experimental
 uncertainty? Explain.
\layout Standard

(i) Is there any indication of a systematic uncertainty? What are the possible
 sources of error?
\the_end
