#This file was created by <vineyard> Fri Jul 28 08:50:02 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Instantaneous Velocity
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item To make plausible the idea of velocity at an instant.
 
\backslash 
item To demonstrate that nonuniform motion appears increasingly uniform
 as the time interval becomes successively shorter.
 
\backslash 
item To understand the notion of ``taking a limit''.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus:
\layout Itemize

Track and cart 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
Science Workshop 750 Interface
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
DataStudio
\shape default 
 software (Instantaneous Velocity application)
\layout Itemize

Motion detector
\layout Itemize

Lab stand
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity 1: An experiment} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Open Instantaneous Velocity application in the {
\backslash 
bf 131 Workshop} submenu of the {
\backslash 
bf Apple} menu.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item You will release a cart to roll down the track toward the motion detector.
 {
\backslash 
it Stop the cart before it hits the ranger}.
 Also, be sure to aim the mtion detector at the cart and that there are
 no people or extraneous objects within a 20 degree cone of the track (with
 vertex at the motion detector).
 Spurious motions within the sensitivity of the mtion detector give false
 signals.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Place the cart near the 2-meter mark at the raised end of the track,
 opposite that on which the motion detector is mounted.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Release the cart from rest and start recording data.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item A graph with dots at regular {
\backslash 
bf 
\backslash 
it time} intervals will be created on the screen.
 Stop the cart before it hits the motion detector.
 You may need to repeat the data taking until you get a reasonable looking
 chart (see Question 1).
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Print out a copy of the graph for each member of the lab group.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
medskip
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Questions:}
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
1.
 Describe the distribution of the dots.
 Are they as you would have expected? Is the motion it represents uniform
 or not? Explain.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
2.
 Using the cursor select ten data points on your graph.
 Click on the Zoom In button on the graph menu bar until the highlighted
 data points span the graph.
 Notice that the Zoom In button has the effect of viewing the data over
 successively shorter time intervals.
 What does examining the data over successively shorter time intervals demonstra
te? Explain.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
3.
 Use the Smart Tool on the graph menu bar to record the position and time
 for the first and last points highlighted on the graph.
 Calculate 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta x/\Delta t \)
\end_inset 

 and explain the significance of this quantity.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Discussion} You just approximated the instantaneous velocity for the
 central point of your section of dots.
 The instantaneous velocity is the velocity the object would have at a particula
r instant if it were moving at uniform velocity during the entire interval.
 You also approximated a derivative: the ratio of the displacement to the
 time interval as the time interval approaches zero seconds.
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity 2: A Graphing Exercise} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item On the next page, you will find three position versus clock reading
 graphs.
 The first one depicts motion over an eight second time interval.
 We want to know the instantaneous velocity at clock reading 3 sec.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item On the second graph, replot the outlined segment of the first graph,
 this time magnifying both position and time by a factor of ten.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item On the third graph, magnify again by a factor of ten the equivalent
 section of the second graph around clock reading 3 sec and position 16
 cm.
 
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item If you are satisfied with the straightness of the line in the third
 graph, calculate $
\backslash 
frac{
\backslash 
Delta s}{
\backslash 
Delta t}$, the average velocity for this interval.
 Since the line is sufficiently straight, the result of your calculation
 may be identified also as the instantaneous velocity at the midpoint of
 the interval.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item The curve in the first graph depicts the motion of the object.
 Determine the equation of motion (the equation of the curve).
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Take the derivative of this equation of motion and evaluate it at the
 central clock reading of your final interval.
 This is also a determination of the instantaneous velocity at that clock
 reading.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
medskip
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Questions:}
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
1.
 Compare your two calculations of the instantaneous velocity.
 Are they the same or do they differ? Should they be the same or different?
 Explain.
 
\layout Standard

2.
 Plot a line on the first graph through the point (3s,16cm) which has the
 slope of the line in the last graph.
 What is this line in relation to the motion curve?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 244 670
file instantaneous_velocity_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\the_end
