#This file was created by <vineyard> Sat Jul  8 12:25:06 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Kepler's Laws
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

Adapted from 
\bar under 
Activities in Astronomy
\bar default 
, D.
 Hoff, L.
 Kelsey, and J.
 Neff, Kendall/Hunt Publishing Co., 1978.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item The applicability of Kepler's Laws 
\backslash 
item The mass of the moon
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
bf Introduction} 
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent Based on data provided by Tycho Brahe, Johannes Kepler devised
 three laws of planetary motion:
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
1.
 The orbits of the planets are ellipses with the sun at one focus.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
2.
 A line segment connecting the sun and a given planet sweeps out equal areas
 in equal time intervals.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
3.
 The square of the period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major
 axis of the orbit.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent Newton's Law of Gravitation generalized these laws to apply to
 any two bodies in orbital motion about one another.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent Newton's analysis led to the following formulation of Kepler's
 Third Law:
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{equation} T^2 = 
\backslash 
frac{4
\backslash 
pi^2}{G(M + m)}a^3 
\backslash 
end{equation}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent where $M$ and $m$ are the two masses, $T$ is the period of mutual
 revolution, $G$ is the universal gravitational constant, and $a$ is the
 semi-major axis of their relative orbit.
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item ruler
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity 1: The ellipse} 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
bf Discussion} An ellipse is the set of points in the plane for which the
 sum of the distances from two fixed points is constant.
 The two points are called foci (the plural of focus).
 If the center of the ellipse is at the origin, then the standard form of
 the equation of an ellipse is
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{equation} 
\backslash 
frac{x^2}{a^2} + 
\backslash 
frac{y^2}{b^2} = 1 
\backslash 
end{equation}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent where the curve intercepts the $x$-axis at $(a,0)$ and $(-a,0)$,
 and the $y$-axis at $(0,b)$ and $(0,-b)$.
 If $a > b$, then the foci are at $(
\backslash 
pm c,0)$, where $c = 
\backslash 
sqrt{a^2 - b^2}$.
 If $a < b$, then the foci are at $(0,
\backslash 
pm c)$, where now $c = 
\backslash 
sqrt{b^2 - a^2}$.
 If $a = b$, the ellipse is a circle.
 The departure from circularity is quantified with the term eccentricity,
 defined symbolically as
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{equation} 
\backslash 
varepsilon = 
\backslash 
frac{c}{a} 
\backslash 
end{equation}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent when $a > b$.
 If $P$ is any point on the ellipse, then the sum of its distances from
 the foci is $2a$ for $a > b$, or $2b$ for $a < b$.
 An ellipse can be drawn with a string tacked at the foci, pulling the string
 taut with a pencil, and running the pencil around.
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Sketch an ellipse with an eccentricity of 1.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vskip35pt
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Sketch an ellipse with an eccentricity of 0.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vskip35pt
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity 2: Explorer 35 and Kepler's Laws}
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
bf Discussion} Explorer 35 lifted off from Cape Kennedy on 19 July 1967,
 and entered orbit around the moon on 22 July.
 The satellite, weighing 230 lbs.
 (1.04.4 kg), carried instruments for measuring solar x-rays and energetic
 particles; the solar wind in interplanetary space and its interaction with
 the moon; and the magnetic properties of the moon.
 It continued operation until June 1973, having accomplished all its mission
 objectives.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent The data
\backslash 
footnote{From the NASA-Goddard Space Flight Center.} below form a sample
 set of positions of Explorer 35 in its elliptical orbit about the moon.
 The time interval between position measurements is 15 minutes.
 The unit of length is the radius of the moon.
 The center of the coordinate system is the center of the moon.
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Using Cricket Graph, plot the data and find the major axis and foci.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Find the semi-major axis, the minor axis, the semi-minor axis, the
 eccentricity, and the period of the orbit (this last one, by inspection).
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vskip35pt
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Verify Kepler's First Law.
 [Hint: refer to the definition of an ellipse.]
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vskip35pt
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Determine the areas swept out in a time interval at different points
 of the orbit and show that Kepler's Second Law is valid.
 [Hint: use triangles as an approximation.]
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vskip35pt
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Using the Newtonian form of Kepler's Third Law, find the mass of the
 moon in kilograms.
 [radius of the moon = 1738 km; and G = 6.668 $times$ 10$^{-8}$ cm$^3$/gm
 sec$^2$ = 8.642 $
\backslash 
times$ 10$^{-13}$ km$^3$/kg hr$^2$]
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vfill 
\backslash 
pagebreak 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Questions:
\series default 
 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
Discuss variations in your measurements used to validate the First and Second
 Laws.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
Noting the number of significant figures in the data, how do the variations
 in your measurements compare to the uncertainties in the data?
\layout Enumerate

Estimate the uncertainty in your determination of the mass of the moon.
 What has a greater effect, uncertainties in 
\begin_inset Formula \( a \)
\end_inset 

 or those in 
\begin_inset Formula \( T \)
\end_inset 

?
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vfill 
\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} 
\backslash 
begin{tabular}{c c c c|c c c c} 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
multicolumn{2}{c}{Elapsed} & X & Y & 
\backslash 
multicolumn{2}{c}{Elapsed} & X & Y 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
multicolumn{2}{c}{time} & & & 
\backslash 
multicolumn{2}{c}{time} & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 (h) & (m) & (lunar radii) & (lunar radii) & (h) & (m) & (lunar radii) &
 (lunar radii) 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 0 & 00 & -3.62 & 1.04 & 6 & 00 & 0.27 & 4.86 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 0 & 15 & -3.46 & 0.63 & 6 & 15 & -0.56 & 4.95 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 0 & 30 & -3.25 & 0.20 & 6 & 30 & -0.84 & 5.01 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 0 & 45 & -2.97 & -0.22 & 6 & 45 & -1.12 & 5.03 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 1 & 00 & -2.60 & -0.65 & 7 & 00 & -1.38 & 5.04 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 1 & 15 & -2.14 & -1.03 & 7 & 15 & -1.64 & 5.00 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 1 & 30 & -1.55 & -1.37 & 7 & 30 & -1.89 & 4.95 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 1 & 45 & -0.85 & -1.58 & 7 & 45 & -2.14 & 4.87 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 2 & 00 & -0.03 & -1.59 & 8 & 00 & -2.37 & 4.77 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 2 & 15 & +0.78 & -1.32 & 8 & 15 & -2.59 & 4.65 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 2 & 30 & 1.45 & -0.79 & 8 & 30 & -2.80 & 4.50 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 2 & 45 & 1.87 & -0.11 & 8 & 45 & -2.99 & 4.33 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 3 & 00 & 2.09 & +0.58 & 9 & 00 & -3.17 & 4.14 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 3 & 15 & 2.16 & 1.22 & 9 & 15 & -3.33 & 3.93 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 3 & 30 & 2.11 & 1.82 & 9 & 30 & -3.49 & 3.69 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 3 & 45 & 1.99 & 2.35 & 9 & 45 & -3.59 & 3.42 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 4 & 00 & 1.82 & 2.81 & 10 & 00 & -3.69 & 3.15 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 4 & 15 & 1.61 & 3.22 & 10 & 15 & -3.77 & 2.85 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 4 & 30 & 1.37 & 3.59 & 10 & 30 & -3.81 & 2.52 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 4 & 45 & 1.11 & 3.90 & 10 & 45 & -3.83 & 2.20 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 5 & 00 & 0.85 & 4.16 & 11 & 00 & -3.81 & 1.83 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 5 & 15 & 0.58 & 4.40 & 11 & 15 & -3.76 & 1.46 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 5 & 30 & 0.28 & 4.58 & 11 & 30 & -3.65 & 1.06 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 5 & 45 & 0.00 & 4.74 & 11 & 45 & -3.51 & 0.65 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{tabular} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\the_end
