#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 24 15:49:48 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Momentum Conservation and Center-of-Mass
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives 
\layout Standard

To explore the applicability of conservation of momentum to the mutual interacti
ons among objects that experience no external forces (so that the system
 of objects is isolated).
 You will calculate momentum changes for an isolated system consisting of
 two very unequal masses and to observe momentum changes for a system consisting
 of two equal masses.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\layout Itemize

Two Pasco dynamics carts with equal masses (and springs, magnets, and velcro).
 
\layout Itemize

A track for the carts.
 
\layout Itemize

A video analysis system (
\shape italic 
Adobe Premier
\shape default 
 and 
\shape italic 
VideoPoint
\shape default 
).
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Overview 
\layout Standard

You have now tested Newton's third law under different conditions and it
 always seems to hold.
 The implications of that are profound, because whenever an object experiences
 a force, another entity must also be experiencing a force of the same magnitude.
 A single force is only half of an interaction.
 Whenever there are interactions between two or more objects, it is often
 possible to draw a boundary around a system of objects and say there is
 no net external force on it.
 A closed system with no external forces on it is known as an isolated system.
 Some examples of isolated systems are shown in the figure below.
\layout Standard

As a consequence of Newton's laws, momentum is believed to be conserved
 in isolated systems.
 This means that, no matter how many internal interactions occur, the total
 momentum of each of the systems pictured above should remain constant.
 When one of the objects gains some momentum another part of the system
 must lose the same amount of momentum.
 If momentum doesn't seem to be conserved then we believe that there is
 an outside force acting on the system.
 Thus, by extending the boundary of the system to include the source of
 that force we can save our Law of Momentum Conservation.
 The ultimate isolated system is the whole universe.
 Most astrophysicists believe that momentum is conserved in the universe!
\layout Standard

You will begin this unit by examining a situation in which it appears that
 momentum is not conserved and then seeing how the Law of Conservation of
 Momentum can hold when the whole isolated system is considered.
 In the next activity you will make qualitative observations using two carts
 of equal mass moving toward each other at the same speed.
 You will observe momentum changes for several types of interactions, including
 an elastic and inelastic collision and an explosion.
 
\layout Standard

Next, a new quantity, called the center-of-mass of a system, will be introduced
 as an alternate way to keep track of the momentum associated with a system
 or an extended body.
 In the next unit, you will use this concept to demonstrate that the Law
 of Conservation of Momentum holds for both one-dimensional and two-dimensional
 interactions in isolated systems.
 Several other attributes of the center-of-mass of a system will be studied.
\layout Standard

Examples of isolated systems in which the influence of outside forces is
 negligible are shown below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 538 334
file mom_cons_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
When an Irresistible Force Meets an Immovable Object 
\layout Standard

Let's assume that a superball and the moon (with an astronaut on it) are
 the objects in a closed system.
 (The pull of the earth doesn't affect the falling ball, the astronaut,
 or the moon nearly as much as they affect each other.) Suppose that the
 astronaut drops the superball and it falls toward the moon so that it rebounds
 at the same speed it had just before it hit.
 If momentum is conserved in the interaction between the ball and the moon,
 can we notice the moon recoil? 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Wapping the Moon with a Superball
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Suppose a ball of mass 0.20 kg is dropped and falls toward the surface
 of the moon so that it hits the ground with a speed of 40 m/s and rebounds
 with the same speed.
 According to the Law of Conservation of Momentum, what is the velocity
 of recoil of the moon?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 179 124
file mom_cons_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Will the astronaut notice the jerk as the moon recoils from him? Why
 or why not?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Consider the ball and the moon as an interacting system with no other
 outside forces.
 Why might the astronaut (who hasn't taken physics yet!) have the illusion
 that momentum isn't conserved in the interaction between the ball and the
 moon?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Why might an introductory physics student here on earth have the impression
 when throwing a ball against the floor or a wall that momentum isn't conserved?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Collisions with Equal Masses: What Do You Know?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Let's use momentum conservation to predict the results of some simple collisions.
 The diagrams below show objects of equal mass moving toward each other.
 If the track exerts negligible friction on them then the two cart system
 is isolated.
 Assume that the carts have opposite velocities so that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{v_{1i}} \)
\end_inset 

 = -
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{v_{2i}} \)
\end_inset 

.
 To observe what actually happens, you can use relatively frictionless carts
 with springs, magnets, and Velcro.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Predictions of the Outcome of Collisions 
\layout Standard

(a) Sketch a predicted result of the interaction between two carts that
 bounce off each other so their speeds remain unchanged as a result of the
 collision.
 Use arrows to indicate the direction and magnitude of the velocity of each
 object after the collision.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 299 164
file mom_cons_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Observe a bouncy collision (also known as an elastic collision) and
 discuss whether or not the outcome was what you predicted it to be.
 If not, draw a new sketch with arrows indicating the magnitudes and directions
 of the velocities.
 What is the apparent relationship between the final velocities 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{v_{1f}} \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{v_{2f}} \)
\end_inset 

? How do their magnitudes compare to those of the initial velocities?
\layout Standard

(c) Sketch the predicted result of the interaction between two objects that
 stick to other.
 Use arrows to indicate the direction and magnitude of the velocity of each
 object after the collision.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 299 176
file mom_cons_fig4.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Observe a sticky collision (also known as an inelastic collision) and
 discuss whether or not the outcome was what you predicted it to be.
 If not, draw a new sketch with arrows indicating the magnitudes and directions
 of the velocities.
 What is the apparent relationship between the final velocities 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{v_{1f}} \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{v_{2f}} \)
\end_inset 

? How do their magnitudes compare to those of the initial velocities?
\layout Standard

(e) Sketch a predicted result of the interaction between two objects that
 collide and then explode.
 Use arrows to indicate the direction and magnitude of the velocity of each
 object after the collision.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 299 176
file mom_cons_fig5.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(f) Observe an exploding or "superelastic" collision and discuss whether
 or not the outcome was what you predicted it to be.
 If not, draw a new sketch with arrows indicating the magnitudes and directions
 of the velocities.
 What is the apparent relationship between the final velocities 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{v_{1f}} \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{v_{2f}} \)
\end_inset 

? How do their magnitudes compare to those of the initial velocities?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(g) What is the total momentum (i.e., the vector sum of the initial momenta)
 before the collision or explosion in all three situations?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(h) Does momentum appear to be conserved in each case? Is the final total
 momentum the same as the initial total momentum of the two cart system?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Defining a Center for a Two Particle System 
\layout Standard

What happens to the average position of a system in which two moving carts
 having the same mass interact with each other? That is, what happens to
 <x> = (x
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

 + x
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2} \)
\end_inset 

)/2 as time goes by? What might the motion of the average position have
 to do with the total momentum of the system? To study this situation you
 will need a video movie-making and analysis system.
 In making these observations you'll need to look at the pattern of data
 points that you place over the frames.
 You will not need to create graphs or work with numbers.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Motion of the Average Position
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Imagine interactions between identical carts moving toward each other
 at the same speed as described in Activity 2.
 Do you expect the average position of the carts to move before, during,
 or after the collision or explosion in each case? Might this have anything
 to do with the fact that the total momentum of such a system is zero?
\layout Standard

(b) Let's use video analysis to study a real situation in which the total
 momentum of the system is not zero.
 Do the following: (1) 
\layout Enumerate

Turn the video camera on and center the track in the field-of-view.
 The camera should be about 1 m above the center of the track.
 Align the track so that it is parallel to the border of the movie image.
 Make sure the track is flat by using the small level available at each
 station.
 Place a ruler somewhere in the field-of-view where it won't interfere with
 the collision and parallel to one side of the field-of-view.
 This ruler will be user later to determine the scale.
 
\layout Enumerate

Use two carts that have small magnets placed at one end.
 Make a movie of the collision of two equal mass carts moving in the same
 direction with different speeds.
 Orient the carts so they collide on the sides that hold the magnets.
 See 
\series bold 
Appendix D: Video Analysis
\series default 
 for details on making the movie.
 When you save the movie file give it the name 
\shape italic 
Collision
\shape default 
.
 
\layout Standard

(c) Determine the average position of both carts during the motion.
 To do this task follow the instructions in 
\series bold 
Appendix D: Video Analysis
\series default 
 for creating and calibrating a data table in VideoPoint.
 On each frame click once on the point halfway between the centers of the
 two carts.
 When you are finished go to the 
\series bold 
Edit
\series default 
 menu and highlight 
\series bold 
Leave/Hide Trails
\series default 
.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
How does the position average appear to move? Might this motion have anything
 to do with the fact that the total momentum of the system is directed in
 one direction? What is your evidence?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) You should have found that if the momentum of the carts is constant
 then the average position moves at a constant rate also.
 Suppose the masses of the carts are unequal? How does the average position
 of the two objects move then? Lets have a look at a collision between unequal
 masses.
 Make and analyze a new movie as you did before, but add a significant amount
 of mass to one of the carts.
 Once again track the motion of the average position by clicking halfway
 between the centers of the two carts.
 Is the motion of this average position uniform?
\layout Standard

(d) You should have found the average position of a system of two unequal
 masses does not move at a constant velocity.
 We need to define a new quantity called the center-of-mass that is at the
 center of two equal masses but somewhere else when one of the masses is
 larger.
 Use the video analysis system and your movie to find a"center-of-mass location."
 The center- of-mass is a location in the isolated system that moves at
 a constant velocity before, during, and after the collision.
 Note: You should be able to make some intelligent guesses.
 Describe what you tried and the outcomes in the space below.
 In the future you will develop a formal, mathematical definition of the
 center-of-mass and learn about some of its important characteristics.
 Later, you will apply the center-of-mass concept to the analysis of momentum
 conservation in two-dimensional collisions.
\the_end
