#This file was created by <vineyard> Thu Jul 13 11:16:42 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Moment of Inertia
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objective
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

To investigate Newton's second law of motion for rotating bodies by applying
 it to determine the moment of inertia of a disk.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Moment of Inertia
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

In this experiment you will determine the moment of inertia of a body by
 applying Newton's second law of motion for rotating bodies.
 The moment of inertia of a body is a measure of the tendency of the body
 to resist a change in its state of rotational motion.
 When a net external torque, t, acts on a rigid body free to rotate about
 some axis, an angular acceleration, a, is produced which is proportional
 to the torque.
 The proportionality constant is the moment of inertia, I, of the body.
 This is the rotational analog of Newton's second law of motion.
 
\layout Standard

The experimental setup is shown in the figure below.
 The apparatus consists of a mass, m, connected by a string passing over
 two pulleys to the drum of a rotator.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 355 270
file moment_inertia_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\layout Itemize

Rotator
\layout Itemize

Smart pulley
\layout Itemize

Regular pulley
\layout Itemize

Variety of masses
\layout Itemize

String
\layout Itemize

Vernier caliper
\layout Itemize

2-meter stick
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
Science Workshop 750 Interface
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
DataStudio
\shape default 
 software (Atwood's Machine application)
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Prediction for the Moment of Inertia
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Write the symbolic expression for Newton's second law for rotating bodies
 in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Write an expression for the net torque on the rotator in terms of the
 radius of the rotator drum, r, and the magnitude of the net force supplied
 by the string, F.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(c) Write an expression for the angular acceleration of the rotator drum
 in terms of the radius of the drum, r, and the acceleration of the hanging
 mass, a.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(d) Notice that the net force on the drum, F, is equal to the tension in
 the string, T, minus the frictional force, f.
 Write an expression for F in terms of T and f.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Apply Newton's second law to the hanging mass to obtain an expression
 for the tension, T, in terms of m, g, and a.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(f) The frictional force, f, can be determined by application of the principle
 of conservation of energy.
 If the mass, m, falls a height, h
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

, and then rises a height, h
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2} \)
\end_inset 

, on the rewind, the loss in its potential energy between the two positions
 is equal to the work done by the frictional force.
 Using this, find an expression for f in terms of m, g, h
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

, and h
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2} \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 40mm 
(g) Combine the equations above, to get the following expression for the
 moment of inertia of the rotator (with or without the disk): 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
I=\frac{md^{2}}{4a}\left( g-a-g\frac{h_{1}-h_{2}}{h_{1}+h_{2}}\right) \]

\end_inset 

where d is the diameter of the drum of the rotator.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Determining the Moment of Inertia 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Use the vernier caliper to measure the diameter of the drum of the rotator.
 Each member of the group should make an independent measurement and record
 the average value as d.
 If you have questions about how to read the vernier, consult your instructor.
\layout Standard

(b) Launch the Atwood's Machine application from the 
\series bold 
Apple
\series default 
 menu.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 100mm 
(c) Remove the disk from the rotator and construct a data table below with
 the column headings m, s
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0} \)
\end_inset 

, s
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

, s
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2} \)
\end_inset 

, h
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

, h
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2} \)
\end_inset 

, a, and I.
 Don't forget to include appropriate units in the column headings.
\layout Standard

(d) Hang 50 grams on the string and lower the mass slowly until all the
 string is unwound from the drum.
 Measure and record the distance from the bottom of the mass to the floor
 as s
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0} \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

(e) Rewind the string on the drum until the mass is a few centimeters from
 the upper pulley.
 Measure and record the distance, s
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

, from the floor to the mass.
\layout Standard

(f) Release the mass, start recording data, and stop it at its highest position
 on the rewind.
 Measure and record the distance, s
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2} \)
\end_inset 

, from the floor to this position of the mass.
\layout Standard

(g) The computer will display a graph of the velocity versus time for the
 fall of the mass.
 Fit the data to determine the acceleration and record this value in your
 data table.
\layout Standard

(h) Repeat steps (d)-(g) two more times for a total of three trials.
\layout Standard

(i) Replace the 50 gram mass with a 70 gram mass and repeat steps (d)-(h).
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 100mm 
(j) Place the disk on the rotator, construct a new data table, and repeat
 steps (d)-(i).
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(k) Calculate and record the moment of inertia for each trial.
 Show a sample calculation for one trial in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(l) Determine the average value for the moment of inertia of the rotator
 without the disk and record his value as I
\begin_inset Formula \( _{R} \)
\end_inset 

 below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(m) Determine the average value for the moment of inertia of the rotator
 with the disk and record this value as I
\begin_inset Formula \( _{R+D} \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(n) Calculate and record the experimental value for the moment of inertia
 of the disk, I
\begin_inset Formula \( _{exp} \)
\end_inset 

 = I
\begin_inset Formula \( _{R+D} \)
\end_inset 

 - I
\begin_inset Formula \( _{R} \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 40mm 
(o) Calculate the theoretical moment of inertia of the disk, I
\begin_inset Formula \( _{th} \)
\end_inset 

, assuming that it is uniform, and determine the % difference between I
\begin_inset Formula \( _{exp} \)
\end_inset 

 and I
\begin_inset Formula \( _{th} \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

(p) Does the experimental value for the moment of inertia of the disk agree
 with the theoretical value within experimental uncertainties? Do the results
 verify Newton's second law of motion for rotating bodies?
\the_end
