#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 17 10:04:39 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Periodic Motion
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard

Objectives 
\layout Itemize

To learn directly about some of the characteristics of periodic motion period,
 frequency, and amplitude.
 
\layout Itemize

To investigate the relationships between position, velocity, acceleration,
 and force in simple harmonic motion.
 
\layout Itemize

To investigate energy in simple harmonic motion.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Introduction 
\layout Standard

Periodic motion is motion that repeats itself.
 You can see the repetition in the position-, velocity-, or acceleration-time
 graphs.
 The length of time to go through one cycle and begin to repeat the motion
 is called the period.
 The number of cycles in each second is called the frequency.
 The unit of frequency, cycles per second is given a special name--Hertz.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Motion of a Mass Hanging from a Spring
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

In this unit you will investigate the motion of a mass hanging from a spring.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

Large spring 
\layout Itemize

Force probe 
\layout Itemize

Motion detector 
\layout Itemize

Variety of masses 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
Science Workshop 750 Interface
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
DataStudio
\shape default 
 software (Position & Velocity Graphs application and SHM application)
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Periodic Motion of a Mass-Spring System
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Open the Position & Velocity Graphs application in the 131 Workshop
 submenu of the Apple menu.
 Hang the large spring from the force probe hook with the large diameter
 coils down and hang a 200-g mass from the spring.
 Place the motion detector facing up directly below the spring.
 Push the mass straight upward 15 cm, and let go.
 Adjust the height of the support so that the mass comes no closer than
 0.15 m to the detector.
 Record data for a few seconds to display position-time and velocity-time
 graphs of the motion.
 Sketch the graphs on the axes below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 409 268
file periodic_motion_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Comment: Note that when an object returns to the same position, it does
 not necessarily mean that a cycle is ending.
 It must return to the same position, and the velocity and acceleration
 must also return to the same values in both magnitude and direction for
 this to be the start of a new cycle.
 
\layout Standard

(b) Label the graphs above with: "B" at the Beginning of a cycle and "E"
 at the End of the same complete cycle.
 "A" on each spot where the mass is moving Away from the detector fastest.
 "T" on each spot where the mass is moving Toward the detector fastest.
 "S" on each spot where the mass is standing Still.
 "F" where the mass is Farthest from the motion detector.
 "C" where the mass is Closest to the motion detector.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Do the position and velocity graphs appear to have the same period?
 Do their peaks occur at the same times? If not, how are the peaks related
 in time?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(d) Use the Smart Tool to measure the period and frequency of the motion.
 (For better accuracy, measure the total time over as many cycles as possible
 and divide by the number of cycles.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Using the Smart Tool, determine and record the maximum displacement.
 Then record data with the mass at rest to find the equilibrium position.
 Draw a straight line on your position graph indicating the equilibrium
 position in terms of the distance from the motion detector.
 Calculate and record the amplitude of the motion (the difference between
 the maximum displacement and the equilibrium position).
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Simple Harmonic Motion 
\layout Standard

The motion of a mass hanging from a spring that you looked at in Activity
 1 is a close approximation to a kind of periodic motion called simple harmonic
 motion (sometimes abbreviated SHM).
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: What Factors Determine the Period of the Mass-Spring System?
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
What can you do to change the period of the SHM of the mass-spring system?
 What will happen to the period if you increase the amplitude? Increase
 the mass? Increase the spring constant (use a stiffer spring)?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: The Period of SHM and the Amplitude
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(a) Repeat the procedure of Activity 1, but with a different starting position
 (other than 15 cm).
 (Warning: Do not make the amplitude so large that the mass comes closer
 than 0.15 m from the motion detector.) When you have good graphs, find and
 record the period and the amplitude using the methods described in Activity
 1.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Take ratios of the period and the amplitude of Activity 1 to those determine
d here.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Is there evidence that the period depends on amplitude? (Did the change
 in amplitude result in a comparable change in period?) Explain.
 How does this compare with your prediction?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: The Dependence of the Period of a SHM on the Mass
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(a) Carefully measure the period for two other masses.
 Record the masses and the measured periods in a table the space below along
 with the mass and period from Activity 1.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Does the period depend on the mass? Does it increase or decrease as
 mass is increased?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Determine the mathematical relationship between the period T and the
 mass m by finding a function that fits the data.
 Write the equation that provides the best fit to the data in the space
 below.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Comment:
\series default 
 You should have found that T is independent of amplitude and proportional
 to 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sqrt{m} \)
\end_inset 

.
 The actual expression for the period is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
T=2\pi \sqrt{\frac{m}{k}.}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Velocity, Acceleration, Force and Energy 
\layout Standard

In this investigation you will look more carefully at the distance, velocity
 and acceleration graphs for simple harmonic motion.
 You will also look at the force graph, and will examine the energy associated
 with simple harmonic motion.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 5: Determination of the Spring Constant 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 40mm 
Measure the distance the spring stretches for four different masses and
 use this data to determine the spring constant, k.
 Record your data and the result for k in the space below.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 6: Velocity, Acceleration, and Force for SHM
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Consider the motion you looked at in Activity 1 when the mass was 200
 g and the initial position was 15 cm.
 Sketch the position and velocity graphs that you observed on the axes below
 using dashed lines.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 341 117
file periodic_motion_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 355 380
file periodic_motion_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(b) Based on what you know about the relationships between velocity, acceleratio
n, and force, use dashed lines to sketch your predictions for the acceleration
 and force graphs.
\layout Standard

(c) Suspend the 200-g mass from the spring and open the SHM application.
 Start the mass oscillating with an amplitude of 15 cm and record data for
 a few seconds.
 When you have obtained good graphs, sketch the results on the above axes
 using solid lines.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) When the mass is at its maximum distance from the detector, is the velocity
 maximum, minimum or some other value according to your graphs? Does this
 agree with your predictions? Does this agree with your observations of
 the oscillating mass? Explain.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) When the mass has its maximum positive velocity, is its distance from
 the detector maximum, minimum, the equilibrium value or some other value
 according to your graphs? What about when it reaches maximum negative velocity?
 Does this agree with your predictions? Does this agree with your observations
 of the oscillating mass? Explain.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(f) According to your graphs, for what distances from the detector is the
 acceleration maximum? For what distances is the acceleration zero? What
 is the velocity in each of these cases?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(g) Compare the force and acceleration-time graphs.
 Describe any similarities.
 Does the force graph agree with your prediction?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(h) From your graphs, what would you say is the relationship between force
 and acceleration? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(i) Compare the force and distance(position)-time graphs.
 What would you say is the relationship between force and position? 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 7: Energy of a Mass Undergoing SHM 
\layout Standard

Now use the graphs from the last activity to examine the energy relationships
 in simple harmonic motion.
 
\layout Standard

(a) At what points is the kinetic energy of the mass zero? Label these points
 on your distance and velocity graphs above with a K.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Calculate the elastic potential energy due to the spring at one of these
 points.
 Label the point you use on your velocity and distance graphs with a 1.
 Use U = (1/2)kx
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{2} \)
\end_inset 

 where x is the distance from the equilibrium position and k is the force
 constant of the spring which you have already measured.
 Use the Smart Tool to measure x.
 Show your data and calculations in the space below.
 
\layout Standard

(c) At what points is the potential energy zero? Label these points with
 a P on your distance and velocity graphs.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) If you measured the kinetic energy at one of these points, what would
 you expect its value to be? Explain.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Check your prediction.
 Calculate the kinetic energy at one of these points.
 Label the point you use on your velocity graph with a 2.
 Use K = (1/2) mv
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{2} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Use the Smart Tool to determine v.
 Show your data and calculations in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(f) Did your calculated kinetic energy agree with your prediction?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(g) If you calculated the potential and kinetic energies at a point where
 neither of these was zero, what would you expect the total energy to be?
 Explain.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 40mm 
(h) Check your prediction.
 Pick a point where the mass has both kinetic and potential energy and calculate
 them both.
 Label this point on your distance and velocity graphs with a 3.
 Show your calculations.
\layout Standard

(i) Does your result agree with your prediction? Does it appear that energy
 is conserved? Explain.
\the_end
