#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 24 16:01:16 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Introduction to Rotation
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

To understand the definitions of angular velocity and angular acceleration
 and the kinematic equations for rotational motion on the basis of observations.
 We will discover the relationship between linear velocity and angular velocity
 and between linear acceleration and angular acceleration.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\layout Itemize

A rotator consisting of an axle, a metal disk, and a fixture to hold the
 disk.
 
\layout Itemize

A stopwatch.
 
\layout Itemize

A meter stick, drawing compass, flexible ruler, a protractor, and some string.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Overview 
\layout Standard

Earlier in the course, we studied centripetal force and acceleration, which
 characterize circular motion.
 In general, however, we have focused on studying motion along a straight
 line as well as the motion of projectiles.
 We have defined several measurable quantities to help us describe linear
 and parabolic motion, including position, velocity, acceleration, force,
 and mass.
 In the real world, many objects undergo circular motion and/or rotate while
 they move.
 The electron orbiting a proton in a hydrogen atom, an ice skater spinning,
 and a hammer which tumbles about while its center-of-mass moves along a
 parabolic path are just three of many rotating objects.
 
\layout Standard

Since many objects undergo rotational motion it is useful to be able to
 describe their motions mathematically.
 The study of rotational motion is also very useful in obtaining a deeper
 understanding of the nature of linear and parabolic motion.
\layout Standard

We are going to try to define several new quantities and relationships to
 help us describe the rotational motion of rigid objects, i.e., objects that
 do not change shape.
 These quantities will include angular velocity, angular acceleration, rotationa
l inertia and torque.
 We will then use these new concepts to develop an extension of Newton's
 second law to describe rotational motion for masses more or less concentrated
 at a single point in space (e.g., the electron in the hydrogen atom) and
 for extended objects (like the tumbling hammer).
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Rigid vs.
 Non-rigid Objects
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

We will begin our study of rotational motion with a consideration of some
 characteristics of the rotation of rigid objects about a fixed axis of
 rotation.
 The motions of objects, such as clouds, that change size and shape as time
 passes are hard to analyze mathematically.
 In this unit we will focus primarily on the study of the rotation of particles
 and rigid objects around an axis that is not moving.
 A rigid object is defined as an object that can move along a line or can
 rotate without the relative distances between its parts changing.
 
\layout Standard

Shown in the figure below are examples of a non-rigid object in the form
 of a cloud that can change shape and of a rigid object in the form of an
 empty coffee cup that does not change shape.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 239 84
file rotation_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 0.3cm 
A hammer tossed end over end and an empty coffee cup are examples of rigid
 objects.
 A ball of clay that deforms permanently in a collision and a cloud that
 grows are examples of non-rigid objects.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
A Puzzler
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Use your imagination to solve the rotational puzzler outlined below.
 It's one that might stump someone who hasn't taken physics.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Horses of a Different Speed 
\layout Standard

You are on a white horse, riding off at sunset with your beau on a chestnut
 mare riding at your side.
 Your horse has a speed of 4.0 m/s and your beau's horse has a speed of 3.5
 m/s, yet he/she constantly remains at your side.
 Where are your horses? Make a sketch to explain your answer.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 104 90
file rotation_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Review of the Geometry of Circles 
\layout Standard

Remember way back before you came to college when you studied equations
 for the circumference and the area of a circle? Let's review those equations
 now, since you'll need them a lot from here on in.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Circular Geometry
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) What is the equation for the circumference, C, of a circle of radius
 r? What are its units?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 53 55
file rotation_fig4.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) What is the equation for the area, A, of a circle of radius r? What
 are its units?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) If someone told you that the area of a circle was A = r, how could you
 refute them immediately? What's wrong with the idea of area being proportional
 to r?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Distance from an Axis of Rotation and Speed 
\layout Standard

Let's begin our study by examining the rotation of objects about a common
 axis that is fixed.
 What happens to the speeds of different parts of a rigid object that rotates
 about a common axis? How does the speed of the object depend on its distance
 from an axis? You should be able to answer this question by observing the
 rotational speed of the rotator at each experimental station.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 248 140
file rotation_fig5.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Place the disk in the fixture and slowly rotate it a constant speed.
 The figure below shows the rotator and the definition of angular displacement.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 198 97
file rotation_fig6.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Spinning the Rotator Speed vs.
 Radius
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Measure how long it takes the white marker to sweep through a known
 angle.
 Record the time and the angle in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Calculate the distance of the paths traced out by outer edge of the
 white marker and the inner edge as it rotated through the angle you just
 recorded.
 (Note: What do you need to measure to perform this calculation?) Record
 your data below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Calculate the average speed of the outer edge of the white marker and
 the average speed of the inner edge of the marker.
 How do they compare?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Do the speeds seem to be related in any way to the distances of inner
 and outer edges of the white marker from the axis of rotation? If so, describe
 the relationship mathematically.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(e) As you rotate, does the distance from the axis of rotation to the outer
 edge of the white marker change?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(f) As you rotate, does the distance from the axis of rotation to the inner
 edge of the white marker change?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(g) At any given time during your rotation, is the angle between the reference
 axis and the inner edge of the white marker the same as the angle between
 the axis and the outer edge of the white marker, or do the angles differ?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(h)At any given time during your rotation, is the rate of change of the
 angle between the reference axis and the inner edge of the white marker
 the same as the rate of change of the angle between the axis and the outer
 edge, or do the rates differ?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(i) What happens to the linear velocity, 
\series bold 
v
\series default 
, of the outer edge of the marker as it rotates at a constant rate? Hint:
 What happens to the magnitude of the velocity, i.e., its speed? What happens
 to its direction?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(j) Is the outer edge of the white marker accelerating? Why or why not?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Radians, Radii, and Arc Lengths
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

An understanding of the relationship between angles in radians, angles in
 degrees, and arc lengths is critical in the study of rotational motion.
 There are two common units used to measure angles degrees and radians.
\layout Enumerate

A degree is defined as 1/360th of a rotation in a complete circle.
\layout Enumerate

A radian is defined as the angle for which the arc along the circle is equal
 to its radius as shown in the figure below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 195 106
file rotation_fig7.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

In the next series of activities you will be relating angles, arc lengths,
 and radii for a circle.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: Relating Arcs, Radii, and Angles
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Let's warm up with a review of same very basic mathematics.
 What should the constant of proportionality be between the circumference
 of a circle and its radius? How do you know?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 40mm 
(b) Now, test your prediction.
 You and your partners should draw four circles each with a different radius.
 Measure the radius and circumference of each circle.
 Enter your data into 
\shape italic 
CricketGraph
\shape default 
 and fit it.
 Attach the plot to your laboratory write-up and record your results below.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(c) What is the slope of the line that you see (it should be straight)?
 Is that what you expected? What is the % discrepancy between the slope
 you obtained from your measurements and that which you predicted in part
 (a)?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 40mm 
(d) Approximately how many degrees are in one radian? Let's do this experimental
ly.
 Using the compass draw a circle and measure its radius.
 Then, use the flexible ruler to trace out a length of arc, s, that has
 the same length as the radius.
 Next measure the angle in degrees that is subtended by the arc.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Theoretically, how many degrees are in one radian? Please calculate
 your result to three significant figures.
 Using the equation for the circumference of a circle as a function of its
 radius and the constant p=3.1415927...
 figure out a general equation to find degrees from radians.
 
\series bold 
Hint:
\series default 
 How many times does a radius fit onto the circumference of a circle? How
 many degrees fit in the circumference of a circle?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) If an object moves 30 degrees on the circumference of a circle of radius
 1.5 m, what is the length of its path?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(f) If an object moves 0.42 radians on the circumference of a circle of radius
 1.5 m, what is the length of its path?
\layout Standard

(g) Remembering the relationship between the speed of the outer edge of
 the rotator and the distance, r, from the rotator's axis the outer edge,
 what equations would you use to define the magnitude of the average "angular"
 velocity, <
\begin_inset Formula \( \omega  \)
\end_inset 

>? 
\series bold 
Hint:
\series default 
 In words, <
\begin_inset Formula \( \omega  \)
\end_inset 

> is defined as the amount of angle swept out by the object per unit time.
 Note that the answer is not simply 
\begin_inset Formula \( \theta  \)
\end_inset 

/t!
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 142 109
file rotation_fig8.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(h) How many radians are there in a full circle consisting of 360 degrees?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(i) When an object moves in a complete circle in a fixed amount of time,
 what quantity (other than time) remains unchanged for circles of several
 different radii? 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Relating Linear and Angular Quantities
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

It's very useful to know the relationship between the variables s, v, and
 a, which describe linear motion and the corresponding variables 
\begin_inset Formula \( \theta  \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \omega  \)
\end_inset 

, and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \alpha  \)
\end_inset 

, which describe rotational motion.
 You now know enough to define these relationships.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 5: Linear and Angular Variables 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Using the definition of the radian, what is the general relationship
 between a length of arc, s, on a circle and the variables r and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \theta  \)
\end_inset 

 in radians.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Assume that an object is moving in a circle of constant radius, r.
 Take the derivative of s with respect to time to find the velocity of the
 object.
 By using the relationship you found in part (a) above, show that the magnitude
 of the linear velocity, v, is related to the magnitude of the angular velocity,
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \omega  \)
\end_inset 

, by the equation v = 
\begin_inset Formula \( \omega  \)
\end_inset 

r.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Assume that an object is accelerating in a circle of constant radius,
 r.
 Take the derivative of v with respect to time to find the acceleration
 of the object.
 By using the relationship you found in part (b) above, show that the linear
 acceleration, a
\begin_inset Formula \( _{t} \)
\end_inset 

, tangent to the circle is related to the angular acceleration, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \alpha  \)
\end_inset 

, by the equation a
\begin_inset Formula \( _{t} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\begin_inset Formula \( \alpha  \)
\end_inset 

r.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
The Rotational Kinematic Equations for Constant 
\begin_inset Formula \( \alpha  \)
\end_inset 

 
\layout Standard

The set of definitions of angular variables are the basis of the physicist's
 description of rotational motion.
 We can use them to derive a set of kinematic equations for rotational motion
 with constant angular acceleration that are similar to the equations for
 linear motion.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 6: The Rotational Kinematic Equations 
\layout Standard

The figure below shows a massless string is wound around a spool of radius
 r.
 The mass falls with a constant acceleration, a.
 Refer to this figure and answer the following questions.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 246 151
file rotation_fig9.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) What is the equation for 
\begin_inset Formula \( \theta  \)
\end_inset 

 in terms of y and r?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) What is the equation for 
\begin_inset Formula \( \omega  \)
\end_inset 

 in terms of v and r?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(c) What is the equation for 
\begin_inset Formula \( \alpha  \)
\end_inset 

 in terms of a and r?
\layout Standard

(d) Consider the falling mass in the figure above.
 Suppose you are standing on your head so that the positive y-axis is pointing
 down.
 Using the relationships between the linear and angular variables in parts
 (a), (b), and (c), derive the rotational kinematic equations for constant
 accelerations for each to the linear kinematic equations listed below.
 
\series bold 
Warning:
\series default 
 Don't just write the analogous equations! Show the substitutions needed
 to derive the equations on the right from those on the left.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 

\begin_inset Formula \( v=v_{0}+at\qquad \qquad \qquad \omega = \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 

\begin_inset Formula \( y=y_{0}+v_{0}t+\frac{1}{2}at^{2}\qquad \qquad \theta = \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( v^{2}=v_{0}^{2}+2ay\qquad \qquad \qquad \omega ^{2}= \)
\end_inset 


\the_end
