#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 24 15:38:55 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

The Ski Jump
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Introduce projectile motion 
\backslash 
item Discover the angular dependence for trajectories
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
small {
\backslash 
bf Note:} The ski jump works by releasing the metal ball to roll down the
 channel and recording where it lands.
 For the purposes of laboratory exercise, the ball should be released from
 the same vertical height for all trials; use the horizontal support attached
 to the tall rod as a convenient reference point.
 The launch point is connected to a horizonal support attached to a short
 rod.
 This horizonal support rotates when you move the base of the tall rod nearer
 to or farther from the shorter rod.
 This rotation determines the angle at which the jump originates.
 The launching angle may be determined with a ruler and protractor by holding
 the ruler against the track in parallel with the launch point and then
 measuring the angle above the horizontal with the protractor (see figure
 below).}
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 178 146
file ski_jump_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item jump chute 
\backslash 
item metal ball 
\backslash 
item protractor and ruler 
\backslash 
item two wooden boards 
\backslash 
item sheets of white and carbon paper
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity:} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 Set up the jump and landing surface so that the launch point and landing
 surface are at the same height.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 With the benefit of several trial runs at different angles, decide where
 you should tape a piece of white paper down so all jumps will land on the
 paper.
 Cover the paper with a piece of carbon paper, ink side down.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 Attempt several jumps each at a number of different angles, say 20, 30,
 37, 45, 53, 60, and 70 degrees.
 Circle the impact points for a given angle and label them before proceeding
 to the next angle.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 Note the relative ranges of the ball's flight as a function of the launching
 angle: 
\backslash 
vskip35pt
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Questions:
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Is the range always the same, or does it depend on the angle? Describe the
 dependence, if any.
 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
At which angle is the range a maximum?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
How are the ranges and angles related on either side of the maximum?
\layout Enumerate

How do you think this angular dependence would change for landing surfaces
 at different heights? Test your predictions.
\the_end
