#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 24 15:55:31 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Two-Dimensional Collisions
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

To test experimentally that the Law of Conservation of Momentum holds for
 two-dimensional collisions in isolated systems.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\layout Itemize

A set of ball bearings, pendulum bob, a protractor, a level, some carts,
 and a wooden board.
\layout Itemize

A video analysis system (
\shape italic 
Adobe Premier
\shape default 
 and 
\shape italic 
VideoPoint
\shape default 
).
\layout Standard


\series bold 
2-D Collisions Intelligent Guesses & Observations 
\layout Standard

Conservation of momentum can be used to solve a variety of collision and
 explosion problems.
 So far we have only considered momentum conservation in one dimension,
 but real collisions lead to motions in two and three dimensions.
 For example, air molecules are continually colliding in space and bouncing
 off in different directions.
 
\layout Standard

You probably know more about two dimensional collisions than you think.
 Draw on your prior experience with one-dimensional collisions to anticipate
 the outcome of several two dimensional collisions.
 Suppose you were a witness to several accidents in which you closed your
 eyes at the moment of collision each time two vehicles heading toward each
 other crashed.
 Even though you couldn't stand to look, can you predict the outcome of
 the following accidents?
\layout Standard

You see car A enter an intersection at the same time as car B coming from
 its left enters the intersection.
 Car B is the same make and model as car A and is traveling at the same
 speed.
 The two cars collide and bounce off one another.
 What happens? Hint: You can use a symmetry argument, your intuition or
 a quick analysis of 1-D results.
 For example, pick a coordinate system and think about two separate accidents:
 the x accident in which car B is moving at speed v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{bx} \)
\end_inset 

 and car A is standing still, and the y accident in which car A is moving
 at speed v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ay} \)
\end_inset 

 = v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{bx} \)
\end_inset 

 and car B is standing still.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 230 67
file twod_collisions_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The diagram below shows an aerial view of several possible two-dimensional
 accidents that might occur.
 The first is a collision at right angles of two identical cars.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 347 240
file twod_collisions_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Qualitative 2-D Collisions 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Using the diagram above, draw a dotted line in the direction you think
 your two cars will move after a collision between cars with equal masses
 and velocities.
 Explain your reasoning in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Draw a dotted line for the direction the cars might move if car A were
 traveling at a speed much greater than that of car B.
 Explain your reasoning in the space below.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) If instead of a car, the vehicle A were a large truck traveling at the
 same speed as car B, in what direction will the vehicles move? Draw the
 dotted lines.
 Explain your reasoning in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Now suppose that the two vehicles are traveling at the same speed.
 If the two vehicles were to stick together; in what direction would they
 move after the collision, if they undergo a perfectly inelastic collision?
 Explain your reasoning in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Finally, set up these types of collisions.
 Observe each type of collision several times.
 Draw solid lines in the diagram above for the results.
 How good were your predictions? Explain your reasoning in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(f) What rules have you devised to predict more or less what is going to
 happen as the result of a two dimensional collision?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Theory of 2D Momentum Conservation 
\layout Standard

Since momentum is a vector, the Law of Conservation of Momentum in two dimension
s requires that if the vector conservation equation is broken into components
 then the conservation law must also hold for each of the vector components.
 Thus, if we consider the interaction of several objects, and if 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\Sigma \overrightarrow{p}=\overrightarrow{p_{1i}}+\overrightarrow{p_{2i}}+\overrightarrow{p_{3i}}+\ldots =\overrightarrow{p_{1f}}+\overrightarrow{p_{2f}}+\overrightarrow{p_{3f}}+\ldots =a\: constant\]

\end_inset 

then
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\Sigma p_{x}=p_{1ix}+p_{2ix}+p_{3ix}+\ldots =p_{1fx}+p_{2fx}+p_{3fx}+\ldots =a\: constant\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

and
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\Sigma p_{y}=p_{1iy}+p_{2iy}+p_{3iy}+\ldots =p_{1fy}+p_{2fy}+p_{3fy}+\ldots =a\: constant\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

If a coordinate system is chosen and a given momentum vector makes an angle
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \theta  \)
\end_inset 

 with respect to the designated x-axis then the momentum vector can be broken
 into components in the usual way:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\overrightarrow{p}=p_{x}\widehat{i}+p_{y}\widehat{j}=p\cos \theta \widehat{i}+p\sin \theta \widehat{j}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Let's consider an interaction in which a large mass collides with two smaller
 hard masses connected by a blob of clay.
 Assume that this interaction causes the bundle of masses to divide into
 three fragments as shown in the figure below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 413 142
file twod_collisions_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Taking Components 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
(a) Consider mass #1.
 Suppose m
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

 = 2.0 kg and the speed v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 1.5 m/s.
 What is the initial x-component of momentum? The initial y-component of
 momentum? Show your calculations.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1ix} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1iy} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Consider mass #2.
 Suppose m
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2} \)
\end_inset 

 = 1.8 kg and the speed v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 2.3 m/s.
 If 
\begin_inset Formula \( \theta  \)
\end_inset 

 = 40
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{\circ } \)
\end_inset 

, what is the initial x-component of momentum? The initial y-component of
 momentum? Show your calculations.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Is Momentum Conserved in Two Dimensions? 
\layout Standard

During the last few sessions we have placed a lot of faith in the power
 of Newton's second and third laws to predict that momentum is always conserved
 in collisions.
 We have tested the conservation of momentum for one-dimensional collisions
 and have shown mathematically and experimentally for one-dimensional collisions
 that if momentum is conserved the center- of-mass of a system will move
 at a constant velocity regardless of how many internal interactions take
 place.
 Now, let's test whether a collision in an isolated two body system will
 conserve momentum within the limits of experimental uncertainty.
 
\layout Standard

Consider two ball bearings that are free to move in two dimensions on a
 table.
 We will record and analyze a video of the two bearings colliding.
 You can then find the x- and y-components of the momentum for each bearing
 and test the conservation of momentum in a closed system.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Testing the Conservation of Momentum 
\layout Standard

(a) Make a movie of two ball bearings colliding by following these steps.
 
\layout Enumerate

Turn the camera on and center the wooden board in the field of view.
 The camera should be about 1 m above the center of the board where one
 bearing(the target) will sit.
 The target bearing should be located straight down below the camera.
 Use the pendulum bob to position the camera and bearing.
 Make sure the board is flat by using the small level available at each
 station.
 Place a ruler somewhere in the field-of-view where it won't interfere with
 the collision and parallel to one edge of the field of view.
 This ruler will be user later to determine the scale.
 
\layout Enumerate

Make a movie of one bearing (the projectile) rolling into the other, stationary
 bearing (the target).
 See 
\series bold 
Appendix D: Video Analysis
\series default 
 for details on making the movie.
 Make the collision a glancing one so that the projectile is scattered to
 some large angle (otherwise, you will only test momentum conservation in
 one dimension).
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
(b) Determine the position of both bearings (the target and the projectile)
 during the motion.
 To do this task follow the instructions in 
\series bold 
Appendix D: Video Analysis
\series default 
 for creating, calibrating, and analyzing movie data.
 On each frame click once on the projectile bearing and once on the target.
 The data table should contain five columns with the values of time, x and
 y positions of the projectile, and x and y positions of the target.
 When you calibrate the movie data, note the number of frames per second
 and record the time interval between successive frames.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 

\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

t = 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
(c) Record the masses of the two ball bearings.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
m
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 
m
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 

\layout Standard

(d) Create a graph of vertical position versus horizontal position for the
 projectile.
 See 
\series bold 
Appendix C: Introduction to Cricket Graph
\series default 
 for more details.
 Make sure the x and y axes cover intervals of the same size so the plot
 is not distorted.
 You can adjust the range of an axis by double-clicking anywhere along the
 axis and modifying the parameters in the pop-up window that appears.
 Next, you need to plot the position of the target on the same graph.
 Under the 
\series bold 
Graph
\series default 
 menu in 
\shape italic 
Cricket Graph
\shape default 
 drag down to 
\series bold 
Overlay Graph
\series default 
 and then drag over to the scatter plot icon and release the mouse.
 Select the vertical and horizontal position data for the target and click
 OK.
 You should see both sets of data on a single graph.
 If not, try again.
 If there are still problems, consult your instructor.
 Print the graph and attach it to this unit.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(e) Draw by eye a best fit line through the points corresponding to the
 trajectory of the projectile before the collision.
 This line will become a new x-axis when you analyze the momentum components
 of the system.
 Draw best fit lines through the points for both ball bearings after the
 collision.
 What are the angles of the paths of the target and projectile after the
 collision with respect to trajectory of the incoming projectile before
 the collision? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
(f) Use the graph to measure the distance each bearing covered before and
 after the collision.
 What is the average velocity for each ball bearing before and after the
 collision? (Hint: Use the value of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

t that you found earlier).
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 
v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1f} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 

\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 
v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2f} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 

\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
(e) What are the momentum components for each ball bearing before and after
 the collision? What is the momentum of the system before the collision
 along the path of the incoming projectile? What is the momentum of the
 entire system after the collision? Within the limits of experimental uncertaint
y is momentum conserved? What is your evidence? What are possible sources
 of uncertainty in your data?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1ix} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1iy} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 

\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2ix} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2iy} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\hfill 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1fx} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{1fy} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\hfill 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2fx} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\hfill 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{2fy} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 

\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ix} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{iy} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\hfill 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{fx} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 
p
\begin_inset Formula \( _{fy} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\hfill 
 
\the_end
