#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 10 10:04:58 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Work and Kinetic Energy
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material have been modified locally and may not have been
 classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

To discover Hooke's law.
 
\layout Itemize

To understand the concept of kinetic energy and its relationship to work
 as embodied in the work-energy theorem.
 
\layout Itemize

To develop an understanding of the physical significance of mathematical
 integration.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
The Force Exerted on a Mass by an Extended Spring
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

So far we have pushed and pulled on an object with a constant force and
 calculated the work needed to displace that object.
 In most real situations the force on an object can change as it moves.
 
\layout Standard

What happens to the average force needed to stretch a spring from 0 to 1
 cm compared to the average force needed to extend the same spring from
 10 to 11 cm? How does the applied force on a spring affect the amount by
 which it stretches, i.e.
 its displacement.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus 
\layout Itemize

A large spring 
\layout Itemize

A support rod to hang the spring 
\layout Itemize

A 2-meter stick 
\layout Itemize

A variety of masses
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Are Spring Forces Constant?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
Hang the spring from a support rod with the large diameter coils in the
 downward position.
 Extend the spring from 0 to 1 cm.
 Feel the force needed to extend the spring.
 Extend the spring from 10 to 11 cm.
 Feel the force needed to extend the spring again.
 How do the two forces compare? Are they the same? 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
The Force and Work Needed to Stretch a Spring
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Now we would like to be able to quantify the force and work needed to extend
 a spring as a function of its displacement from an equilibrium position
 (i.e.
 when it is "unstretched" ).
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Force vs.
 Displacement for a Spring 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 60mm 
(a) Measure the distance from the floor to the lower end of the spring and
 record this distance as s
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0} \)
\end_inset 

 below.
 Create a data table in the space below with the column headings m (kg),
 s (m), F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

 (N), x (m), 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

x (m), <F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

> (N), 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

W (J), and W
\begin_inset Formula \( _{total} \)
\end_inset 

 (J).
 Hang different masses in 0.100 kg increments up to 1.000 kg and measure the
 distance from the floor to the lower end of the spring, s, for each mass.
 Record the values of m and s in the data table.
 Calculate and record the external force, F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

, and the stretch of the spring, x (= s
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0} \)
\end_inset 

 - s), for each mass.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Create a graph of F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

 (vertical axis) vs.
 x.
 Is the graph linear? If the force, F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

, increases with the displacement in a proportional way, fit the data to
 find the slope of the line.
 Insert a copy of the graph into your notebook.
 Use the symbol k to represent the slope of the line.
 What is the value of k? What are its units? Note: k is known as the spring
 constant.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(c) Write the equation describing the relationship between the external
 force, F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

, and the total displacement, x, of the spring from its equilibrium using
 the symbols F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

, k, and x.
\layout Standard

Note: Any restoring force on an object which is proportional to its displacement
 is known as a Hooke's Law Force.
 There was an erratic, contentious genius named Robert Hooke who was born
 in 1635.
 He played with springs and argued with Newton.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Calculating Work when the Force is not Constant 
\layout Standard

We would like to expand the definition of work so it can be used to calculate
 the work associated with stretching a spring and the work associated with
 other forces that are not constant.
 A helpful approach is to plot the average force needed to move an object
 for each successive displacement 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

x as a bar graph like that shown in the figure below.
 The figure shows a graph representing the average applied force causing
 each unit of displacement of an object.
 This graph represents force that is not constant but not the force vs.
 displacement of a typical spring.
\layout Standard

Note: The bar graph below is intended to illustrate mathematical concepts.
 Any similarity between the values of the forces in the bar graph and any
 real set of forces is purely coincidental.
 In general, the force causing work to be done on an object is not constant.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 335 214
file work_kinetic_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Force vs.
 Distance in a Bar Graph 
\layout Standard

(a) Calculate the width of each displacement, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

x, and the average external force, <F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

>, for each displacement and record the values in the table above.
 Plot <F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

> vs.
 x as a bar graph on the grid below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 248 226
file work_kinetic_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

How can we calculate the work done in stretching the spring? We can use
 several equivalent techniques: (1) adding up little pieces of <F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

> 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

x, (2) finding the area under the "curve" you created, or (3) using mathematical
 integration.
\layout Standard

All three methods should yield about the same result.
 If you have not yet encountered integrals in a calculus course, you can
 compare the results of using the first two methods.
 If you have studied integrals in calculus you may want to consult your
 instructor or the textbook about how to set up the appropriate definite
 integral to calculate the work needed to stretch the spring.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: Calculation of Work 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
(a) Calculate the work needed to stretch the spring by adding up small increment
s of <F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

> 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

x in your table.
 Also record the running sum in the table and summarize the result below.
 Don't forget to specify units.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
W
\begin_inset Formula \( _{total} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Calculate the work needed to stretch the spring by computing the area
 under the curve in the graph of <F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

> vs.
 x that you just created.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) How does adding up the little rectangles in part (a) compare to finding
 the area under the curve in part (b)? 
\layout Standard

Note that in the limit where the x values are very small the sum of <F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

> 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

x, known by mathematicians as the Riemann sum, converges to the mathematical
 integral and to the area under the curve.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Defining Kinetic Energy and Its Relationship to Work
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

What happens when you apply an external force to an object that is free
 to move and has no friction forces on it? Obviously it should experience
 an acceleration and end up being in a different state of motion.
 Can we relate the change in motion of the object to the amount of work
 that is done on it?
\layout Standard

Let's consider a fairly simple situation.
 Suppose an object is lifted through a distance s near the surface of the
 earth and then allowed to fall.
 During the time it is falling it will experience a constant force as a
 result of the attraction between the object and the earth glibly called
 the force of gravity.
 You can use the theory we have already developed for the gravitational
 force to compare the velocity of the object to the work done on it by the
 gravitational field as it falls through a distance y.
 This should lead naturally to the definition of a new quantity called kinetic
 energy, which is a measure of the amount of "motion" gained as a result
 of the work done on the mass.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 5: Equations for Falling v vs.
 y 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) An object of mass m is dropped near the surface of the earth.
 What is the magnitude and direction of its acceleration g?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) If the object has no initial velocity and is allowed to fall for a time
 t under the influence of the gravitational force, what kinematic equation
 describes the relationship between the distance the object falls, y, and
 its time of fall, t? Assume y
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0} \)
\end_inset 

 = 0.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(c) Do you expect the magnitude of the velocity to increase, decrease or
 remain the same as the distance increases? Note: This is an obvious question!!
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Differentiate the equation you wrote down in part (b) to find a relationship
 between v, the acceleration g, and time t.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Eliminate t from the equations you obtained in parts (b) and (d) to
 get an expression that describes how the velocity, v, of the falling object
 depends on the distance, y, through which it has fallen.
 
\layout Standard

You can use the kinematic equations to derive the functional relationship
 you hopefully discovered experimentally in the last activity.
 If we define the kinetic energy (K) of a moving object as the quantity
 K = (1/2)mv
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{2} \)
\end_inset 

, then we can relate the change in kinetic energy as an object falls to
 the work done on it.
 Note that for an object initially at rest the initial kinetic energy is
 K
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 0, so the change in kinetic energy is given by the difference between
 the initial and final kinetic energies.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

K = K
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

 - K
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

 = (1/2)mv
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{2} \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 6: Computing Work and Kinetic Energy of a Falling Mass
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Suppose the mass of your falling object is 0.35 kg.
 What is the value of the work done by the gravitational force when the
 mass is dropped through a distance of y = 1.2 m? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Use the kinematic equation you derived in Activity 5(e) that relates
 v and y to find the velocity of the falling object after it has fallen
 1.2 m.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) What is the kinetic energy of the object before it is dropped? After
 it has fallen 1.2 m? What is the change in kinetic energy, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

K, as a result of the fall?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) How does the work done by the gravitational force compare to the kinetic
 energy change, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

K, of the object?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 7: The Mathematical Relationship between Work and Kinetic Energy
 Change During a Fall 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Since our simplified case involves a constant acceleration, write down
 the equation you derived in Activity 5(e) to describe the speed, v, of
 a falling object as a function of the distance y which it fell.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Using the definition of work, show that W = mgy when the object is dropped
 through a distance y.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) By combining the equations in parts (a) and (b) above, show that in
 theory the work done on a mass falling under the influence of the gravitational
 attraction exerted on it by the earth is given by the equation W = 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

K.
\layout Standard

You have just proven an example of the work-energy theorem which states
 that the change in kinetic energy of an object is equal to the net work
 done on it for all the forces acting on it.
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
W=\Delta K\qquad [Work-Energy\: Theorem]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Although you have only shown the work-energy theorem for a special cases
 where no friction is present, it can be applied to any situation in which
 the net force can be calculated.
 For example, the net force on an object might be calculated as a combination
 of applied, spring, gravitational, and friction forces.
\the_end
