#This file was created by <vineyard> Wed Jul  5 09:55:58 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Position vs.
 Time Graphs
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

To learn about two of the ways that physicists can describe motion in one
 dimension-words and graphs.
 
\layout Itemize

To learn how to relate graphs of position vs.
 time to the motions they represent.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Introduction
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

The focus of this unit on kinematics is to be able to describe your position
 as a function of time using words and graphs.
 You will use a motion detector attached to a computer in the laboratory
 to learn to describe one-dimensional motion.
\layout Standard

The ultrasonic motion detector sends out a series of sound pulses that are
 of too high a frequency to hear.
 These pulses reflect from objects in the vicinity of the motion detector
 and some of the sound energy returns to the detector.
 The computer is able to record the time it takes for reflected sound waves
 to return to the detector and then, by knowing the speed of sound in air,
 figure out how far away the reflecting object is.
 There are several things to watch out for when using a motion detector.
 (1) Do not get closer than 0.15 meters from the detector because it cannot
 record reflected pulses which come back too soon.
 (2) The ultrasonic waves come out in a cone of about 15
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{\circ } \)
\end_inset 

.
 It will see the closest object.
 Be sure there is a clear path between the object whose motion you want
 to track and the motion detector.
 (3) The motion detector is very sensitive and will detect slight motions.
 You can try to glide smoothly along the floor, but don't be surprised to
 see small bumps in velocity graphs.
 (4) Some objects like bulky sweaters are good sound absorbers and may not
 be "seen" well by a motion detector.
 You may want to hold a book or a board in front of you if you have loose
 clothing on.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
Science Workshop 750 Interface
\layout Itemize

Ultrasonic motion detector 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
DataStudio
\shape default 
 software (Position Graphs application)
\layout Itemize

Wooden board
\layout Itemize

Masking tape for marking distances
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Position vs.
 Time Graphs of Your Motion 
\layout Standard

The purpose of this unit is to learn how to relate graphs of position as
 a function of time to the motions they represent.
 How does a position vs.
 time graph look when you move slowly? Quickly? What happens when you move
 toward the motion detector? Away? After completing the next few activities,
 you should be able to look at a position vs.
 time graph and describe the motion of the object.
 You should also be able to look at the motion of an object and sketch a
 graph representing that motion.
\layout Standard

Note that the motion detector measures the distance of an object from the
 detector, and that the motion detector is located at the origin of each
 graph.
 It is common to refer to the distance of an object from some origin as
 the position of the object.
 Therefore, it is better to refer to these graphs as position vs.
 time graphs than distance vs.
 time graphs.
\layout Standard

You will use the 
\shape italic 
DataStudio
\shape default 
 software to do the following activities.
 An application has been created for this purpose.
 Launch the 
\series bold 
Position Graphs 
\series default 
application from the 
\series bold 
131 Workshop
\series default 
 submenu of the 
\series bold 
Apple
\series default 
 menu.
 To start a data run, click the 
\series bold 
Start
\series default 
 button.
 To stop a data run, click the 
\series bold 
Stop
\series default 
 button.
 After a data run, the graph can be expanded by clicking on the 
\series bold 
Scale to fit
\series default 
 button in the upper left corner of the Graph window.
 Multiple data sets can be displayed on the same graph.
 Data can be removed from the graph by selecting 
\series bold 
Delete Last Data Run
\series default 
 or 
\series bold 
Delete All Data Runs
\series default 
 from the 
\series bold 
Experiment
\series default 
 menu.
 When you are finished with the activities, choose 
\series bold 
Quit
\series default 
 from the 
\series bold 
File
\series default 
 menu and do not save this activity.
\layout Standard

Before you begin the activities, you should mark a position scale on the
 floor.
 To do this, position one person at approximately 1 meter in front of the
 motion detector and run the VI for 1 second.
 The computer will display a horizontal line showing the position measured
 by the detector.
 The person standing in front of the detector should then adjust his/her
 position and the procedure repeated until the 1 meter position is established.
 Mark the 1 meter position on the floor with a piece of masking tape and
 then mark the 2, 3 and 4 meter positions using the 2 meter stick.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Making Position vs.
 Time Graphs 
\layout Standard

Make position-time graphs for the following motions and sketch the graph
 you observe in each case:
\layout Standard

(a) Starting at 0.5 m, walk away from the origin (i.e.
 the detector) slowly and steadily.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 165 127
file position_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(b) Walk away from the origin medium-fast and steadily.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 165 127
file position_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(c) Walk toward the detector (origin) slowly and steadily.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 165 127
file position_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Describe the difference between the graph you made by walking away slowly
 and the one made by walking away more quickly.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Describe the difference between the graph made by walking toward and
 the one made walking away from the motion detector.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Predicting a Position vs.
 Time Graph
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Suppose your were to start 1.0 m in front of the detector and walk away
 slowly and steadily for 4 seconds, stop for 4 seconds, and then walk toward
 the detector quickly.
 Sketch your prediction on the axes below using a dashed line.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 468 247
file position_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(b) Test your prediction by moving in the way described and making a graph
 of your motion with the motion detector.
 Sketch the trace of your actual motion on the above graph with a solid
 line.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Is your prediction the same as the final result? If not, describe how
 you would move to make a graph that looks like your prediction.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Matching Position vs.
 Time Graphs
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 408 190
file position_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(a) Describe in your own words how you would move in order to match the
 graph shown above.
\layout Standard

(b) Move to match the above graph on the computer screen.
 You may try a number of times.
 It helps to work as a team.
 Get the times right.
 Get the positions right.
 Do this for yourself.
 (Each person in your group should do his or her own match.) You will not
 learn very much by just watching!
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) What was the difference in the way you moved to produce the two differently
 sloped parts of the graph you just matched?
\layout Standard

(d) Make curved position vs.
 time graphs like those shown below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 284 108
file position_fig4.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(e) Describe how you must move to produce a position vs.
 time graph with each of the shapes shown.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
Graph 1 answer:
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
Graph 2 answer:
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(f) What is the general difference between motions which result in a straight-li
ne position vs.
 time graph and those that result in a curved-line position vs.
 time graph?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Homework
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Answer the following questions in the spaces provided.
\layout Standard

1.What do you do to create a horizontal line on a position-time graph?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 123 87
file position_fig5.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

2.
 How do you walk to create a straight line that slopes up?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 123 87
file position_fig6.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

3.
 How do you walk to create a straight line that slopes down?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 123 87
file position_fig7.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

4.
 How do you move so the graph goes up steeply at first, then continues up
 gradually?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 123 87
file position_fig8.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

5.
 How do you walk to create a U-shaped graph?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 123 87
file position_fig9.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Answer the following about the two objects , A and B, whose motion produced
 the following position-time graphs.
\layout Standard

6.
 (a) Which object is moving faster? (b) Which starts ahead? Define what
 you mean by "ahead.
 "(c) What does the intersection mean?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 206 113
file position_fig10.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

7.
 (a) Which object is moving faster? (b) Which object has a negative velocity
 according to the convention we have established?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 194 105
file position_fig11.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

8.
 (a) Which object is moving faster? (b) Which starts ahead? Define what
 you mean by "ahead.
 "
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 194 105
file position_fig12.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Sketch the position-time graph corresponding to each of the following descriptio
ns of the motion of an object.
\layout Standard

9.
 The object moves with a steady (constant) velocity away from the origin.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 176 100
file position_fig13.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

10.
 The object is standing still.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 176 100
file position_fig13.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

11.
 The object moves with a steady (constant) velocity toward the origin for
 5 seconds and stands still for 5 seconds.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 176 100
file position_fig13.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

12.
 The object moves with a steady velocity away from the origin for 5 seconds,
 then reverses direction and moves at the same speed toward the origin for
 5 seconds.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 176 100
file position_fig13.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

13.
 The object moves away from the origin, starting slowly and speeding up.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 176 100
file position_fig13.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\the_end
