#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 24 15:58:59 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Connecting Angular Displacement with Linear Displacement along the Arc
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Discover the relationship between arc length, radius, and angle 
\backslash 
item Understand radian measure
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\layout Itemize

Wooden disks
\layout Itemize

Meter stick
\layout Itemize

String
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item With the string and meter stick, determine the circumference of the
 disk in cm.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
bigskip
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} circumference = 
\backslash 
rule{3cm}{0.4pt} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Calculate the disk's diameter and radius.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
bigskip
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} diameter = 
\backslash 
rule{3cm}{0.4pt} 
\backslash 
hspace{1cm} radius = 
\backslash 
rule{3cm}{0.4pt} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Check that the meter stick is inserted in the base with the scale visible.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Be sure the string is attached at the 0-mark on the disk.
 Wind the string around the disk one full rotation so that the 0-mark and
 the beginning of the string are at the bottom of the disk and the string
 is wound around once in such a way that when you unwind it, you can pull
 it along the meter stick and the disk will rotate counter-clockwise.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item In this configuration, note the position of the tag on the string with
 reference to the meter stick.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item While keeping the string taut, pull it gently to displace the tag five
 centimeters.
 Record in the table below the angular position of the bottom of the disk.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Repeat step vi in five centimeter increments until the string is completely
 unwound.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Calculate the angular displacements and plot linear displacement versus
 angular displacement.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} 
\backslash 
tabcolsep1cm 
\backslash 
setlength{
\backslash 
unitlength}{1mm} 
\backslash 
begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|} 
\backslash 
hline $
\backslash 
Delta s$ & $
\backslash 
theta$ & $
\backslash 
Delta
\backslash 
theta$ 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 (cm) & (rad) & (rad) 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline 5.0&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 10.0&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 15.0&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 20.0&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 25.0&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 30.0&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 35.0&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 40.0&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 45.0&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
end{tabular} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
smallskip
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Questions:}
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
Do your data points appear to fall on a line? Did you expect them to? Explain.
 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
If you were to fit a line through these points, would that line go through
 the origin? Explain.
 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
Fit a line through the data.
 Express in words the meaning of the slope.
 What is its physical interpretation? 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
If a bigger disk were used, what would your result be? For a given angular
 displacement of the bigger disk, how would the linear displacement differ?
 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
What is the ratio of some arc length to the radius of the disk? 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
The unit given for the angular displacement is rad, which is an abbreviation
 for radians.
 Express, in words, the meaning of the term.
 
\layout Enumerate

How many radians are in half the circumference of the disk? In the whole
 circumference?
\the_end
