#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 10 14:19:47 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Conservation of Mechanical Energy
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives 
\layout Itemize

To understand the concept of potential energy.
 
\layout Itemize

To investigate the conditions under which mechanical energy is conserved.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
VideoPoint
\shape default 
 software 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
Vertical Toss
\shape default 
 movie
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
CricketGraph
\shape default 
 software
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Overview 
\layout Standard

The last unit on work and energy culminated with a mathematical proof of
 the work-energy theorem for a mass falling under the influence of the force
 of gravity.
 We found that when a mass starts from rest and falls a distance y, its
 final velocity can be related to y by the familiar kinematic equation
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
v_{f}^{2}=v_{i}^{2}+2gy\qquad or\qquad gy=\frac{1}{2}\left( v_{f}^{2}-v_{i}^{2}\right) \qquad [Eq.\: 1]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

where 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{f} \)
\end_inset 

 is the final velocity and 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{i} \)
\end_inset 

 is the initial velocity of the mass.
\layout Standard

We believe this equation is valid because: (1) you have derived the kinematic
 equations mathematically using the definitions of velocity and constant
 acceleration, and (2) you have verified experimentally that masses fall
 at a constant acceleration.
 We then asked whether the transformation of the mass from a speed 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{i} \)
\end_inset 

 to a speed 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{f} \)
\end_inset 

 is related to the work done on the mass by the force of gravity as it falls.
\layout Standard

The answer is mathematically simple.
 Since F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{g} \)
\end_inset 

 = mg, the work done on the falling object by the force of gravity is given
 by
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
W_{g}=F_{g}y=mgy\qquad [Eq.\: 2]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

But according to Equation 1, gy = (1/2)
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{f}^{2} \)
\end_inset 

 - (1/2)
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{i}^{2} \)
\end_inset 

, so we can re-write Equation 2 as
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
W_{g}=mgy=\frac{1}{2}mv_{f}^{2}-\frac{1}{2}mv_{i}^{2}\qquad [Eq.\: 3]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The (1/2)mv
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f}^{2} \)
\end_inset 

 is a measure of the motion resulting from the fall.
 If we define it as the energy of motion, or, more succinctly, the kinetic
 energy, we can define a work-energy theorem for falling objects:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
W=\Delta K\qquad [Eq.\: 4]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

or, the work done on a falling object by the earth is equal to the change
 in its kinetic energy as calculated by the difference between the final
 and initial kinetic energies.
\layout Standard

If external work is done on the mass to raise it through a height y (a fancy
 phrase meaning "if some one picks up the mass"), it now has the potential
 to fall back through the distance y, gaining kinetic energy as it falls.
 Aha! Suppose we define 
\shape italic 
potential energy
\shape default 
 to be 
\shape italic 
the amount of external work, W
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

, needed to move a mass at constant velocity through a distance y against
 the force of gravity.

\shape default 
 Since this amount of work is positive while the work done by the gravitational
 force has the same magnitude but is negative, this definition can be expressed
 mathematically as
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
U=W_{ext}=mgy\qquad [Eq.\: 5]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Note that when the potential energy is a maximum, the falling mass has no
 kinetic energy but it has a maximum potential energy.
 As it falls, the potential energy becomes smaller and smaller as the kinetic
 energy increases.
 The kinetic and potential energy are considered to be two different forms
 of mechanical energy.
 What about the total mechanical energy, consisting of the sum of these
 two energies? Is the total mechanical energy constant during the time the
 object falls? If it is, we might be able to hypothesize a law of conservation
 of mechanical energy as follows: 
\shape italic 
In some systems, the sum, E, of the kinetic and potential energy is a constant.
 
\shape default 
This hypothesis can be summarized mathematically by the following statement.
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
E=K+U=constant\qquad [Eq.\: 6]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The idea of mechanical energy conservation raises a number of questions.
 Does it hold quantitatively for falling masses? How about for masses experienci
ng other forces, like those exerted by a spring? Can we develop an equivalent
 definition of potential energy for the mass-spring system and other systems
 and re-introduce the hypothesis of conservation of mechanical energy for
 those systems? Is mechanical energy conserved for masses experiencing frictiona
l forces, like those encountered in sliding?
\layout Standard

In this unit, you will explore whether or not the mechanical energy conservation
 hypothesis is valid for a falling mass.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Is Mechanical Energy Conserved for a Falling Mass?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Is the mechanical energy conservation hypothesis stated above valid for
 a falling mass? In other words, is mechanical energy conserved within the
 limits of uncertainty? You will analyze a video entitled Vertical Toss
 to obtain data for the vertical position of a ball that was tossed in the
 laboratory as a function of time.
 This should give you the information you need to calculate the position
 and average velocity of the ball at each time.
 You can then calculate the kinetic and potential energy for the tossed
 ball in each frame and see if there is any relationship between them.
 
\layout Standard

The vertical toss movie was taken at 30 frames per second.
 The vertical stick in the picture is 2.00 m long.
 Be sure to calibrate using this data.
 Assume the ball has a mass of m = 0.321 kg.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Mechanical Energy for a Falling Mass
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Before you actually do the calculations using data, let's do a little predicting
: 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Where is U a maximum? A minimum?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Where is K a maximum? A minimum?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) If mechanical energy is conserved what should the sum of K+ U be for
 any point along the path of a falling mass?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Energy Analysis for a Falling Mass 
\layout Standard

(a) Perform a video analysis of the Vertical Toss movie to obtain the position
 of the the ball as a function of time.
 See 
\series bold 
Appendix D
\series default 
 for details.
 Copy the data into 
\shape italic 
CricketGraph
\shape default 
.
\layout Standard

(b) Calculate the vertical distance the ball moves during the time intervals
 between adjacent frames.
 To do this:
\layout Enumerate

Double-click on the column ID number of column 4.
 The entire column will be highlighted.
 The column ID (C4) appears in the upper left corner of the data window.
\layout Enumerate

Type "=NDIF(C3,1)" without the quotes and hit return.
 This command calculates the difference between a cell in column 3 (C3)
 and the adjacent one.
 The distance traveled between adjacent frames will be displayed in column
 4.
 Verify the results for one or two cells.
\layout Enumerate

Label the column dy (m).
\layout Standard

(c) Calculate the average velocity for each time interval.
 To do this: 
\layout Enumerate

Double-click on the column ID number of column 5.
 
\layout Enumerate

Type "=C4/0.0333", without quotes, and then hit return.
 Note that the time interval between adjacent frames is 0.0333 s.
 
\layout Enumerate

Choose 
\series bold 
Numeric Format...
 
\series default 
from the 
\series bold 
Options
\series default 
 menu and set the format for 3 decimal places to the right of the decimal
 point.
 The average velocity for each time interval will be displayed in column
 5.
 Verify the results for one or two cells.
 
\layout Enumerate

Label the column v (m/s).
\layout Standard

(d) Calculate the kinetic energy K for each frame (the mass of the ball
 is 0.321 kg).
 To do this: 
\layout Enumerate

Double-click on the column ID number of column 6.
 
\layout Enumerate

Type "=0.321*C5*C5/2", without the quotes, and then hit return.
 
\layout Enumerate

Change the numeric format to 3 decimal places to the right of the decimal
 point and verify the results.
 
\layout Enumerate

Label the column K(J).
\layout Standard

(e) Calculate the potential energy U for each frame in column 7.
\layout Standard

(f) Calculate the total energy E = K + U for each frame in column 8.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(g) Do the maximum and minimum values for each agree with what you predicted?
\layout Standard

(h) Create a graph of K, U, and E vs.
 time.
 Put all three on the same graph.
 Print the graph and put a copy in your notebook.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(i) Is the sum of K and U what you predicted? Does mechanical energy appear
 to be conserved within experimental uncertainties? How would you estimate
 the value of the experimental uncertainty?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Mechanical Energy Conservation 
\layout Standard

How do people in different reference frames near the surface of the earth
 view the same event with regard to mechanical energy associated with a
 mass and its conservation? Suppose the president of your college drops
 a 2.0 kg water balloon from the second floor of the administration building
 (10.0 meters above the ground).
 The president takes the origin of his or her vertical axis to be even with
 the level of the second floor.
 A student standing on the ground below considers the origin of his coordinate
 system to be at ground level.
 Have a discussion with your classmates and try your hand at answering the
 questions below.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Mechanical Energy and Coordinate Systems
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) What is the value of the potential energy of the balloon before and
 after it is dropped according to the president? According to the student?
 Show your calculations and don't forget to include units!
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The president's perspective is that y = 0.0 m at t = 0 s and that y = 10.0
 m when the balloon hits the student): 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
U
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
U
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The student's perspective is that y = 10.0 m at t = 0 s and that y = 0.0 m
 when the balloon hits): 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
U
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
U
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Standard

Note: If you get the same potential energy value for the student and the
 president you are on the wrong track!
\layout Standard

(b) What is the value of the kinetic energy of the balloon before and after
 it is dropped according to the president? According to the student? Show
 your calculations.
 Hint: Use a kinematic equation to find the velocity of the balloon at ground
 level.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
President's perspective: 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
K
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\layout Standard

K
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
Student's perspective: 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
K
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
K
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Standard

Note: If you get the same values for both the student and the president
 for values of the kinetic energies you are on the right track!
\layout Standard

(c) What is the value of the total mechanical energy of the balloon before
 and after it is dropped according to the president? According to the student?
 Show your calculations.
 Note: If you get the same values for both the student and the president
 for the total energies you are on the wrong track!!!!!
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
Presidents perspective: 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
E
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
E
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
Student's perspective: 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
E
\begin_inset Formula \( _{i} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
E
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Why don't the two observers calculate the same values for the mechanical
 energy of the water balloon? 
\layout Standard

(e) Why do the two observers agree that mechanical energy is conserved?
 
\the_end
