#This file was created by <vineyard> Wed Jul  5 13:29:20 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Distinguishing Velocity, Change of Velocity, and Acceleration
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Associate equal speeds 
\backslash 
item Recognize the time interval required for velocity to change 
\backslash 
item Define acceleration
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item track and cart 
\backslash 
item revolving belt 
\backslash 
item two stop watches
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item You will be comparing the motion of a cart rolling down an inclined
 plane with the motion of a revolving belt which moves at constant speed
 parallel to the track.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item The amount of voltage supplied a motor controls the speed of the belt.
 Turn on the power supply and investigate the different belt speeds that
 result from adjusting the voltage knob.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Choose a relatively slow, but steady speed.
 Pick a point on the belt and time its progression between two positions
 a known distance apart.
 Thereby, determine the speed of the point, or any point, on the belt.
 Enter this value in the table below.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Release the cart from rest and time how long it takes to match the
 speed of the belt.
 Repeat this five times and enter the values in the table.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Setting the belt to three progressively higher speeds, repeat steps
 iii and iv for each one.
 Enter the all necessary values to the table.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Compute average times corresponding to the four different belt speeds.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Plot your data on a speed versus time graph.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
medskip
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} 
\backslash 
tabcolsep5mm 
\backslash 
begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|} 
\backslash 
hline belt speed & $t_1$ & $t_2$ & $t_3$ & $t_4$ & $t_5$ & $t$ 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 (m/s) & (s) & (s) & (s) & (s) & (s) & (s) 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline &&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline &&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline &&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline &&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
end{tabular} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Questions:}
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Do your data points appear to fall on a line? Did you expect them to? Explain.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
If you were to fit a line through these points, would that line go through
 the origin? Explain.
 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Fit a line through the data.
 Express in words the meaning of the slope.
 What is its physical interpretation? Is it constant? Explain.
 
\layout Enumerate

If the track were tilted more steeply, how would your results have changed?
 Test your hypothesis by repeating some measurements with the track inclined
 at different angles.
 Where your expectations met or not? Express in words what occurred and
 give a physical explanation.
\the_end
