#This file was created by <vineyard> Sun Jul 16 16:44:34 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Hooke's Law
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item The nature of elastic deformation and restoring forces
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
bf Introduction} There is no such thing as a perfectly rigid body.
 The stiffest of metal bars can be twisted, bent, stretched, and compressed.
 Delicate measurements show that even small forces cause these distortions.
 Under certain circumstances (typically, when the forces are not too large),
 a body deformed by forces acting upon it will return to its original size
 and shape when the forces are removed, a capacity known as elasticity.
 Permanent distortion from large forces is referred to as plastic deformation.
 In this lab, you will stay within the elastic limit.
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item two springs and supports 
\backslash 
item collection of masses 
\backslash 
item 2-meter stick
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity:} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 Record the mass of the two springs.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{displaymath} m_1 = 
\backslash 
hskip50pt
\protected_separator 
 m_2 = 
\backslash 
end{displaymath}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 Suspend one of the springs from the support.
 Using the meter stick, observe the position of the lower end of the spring
 and record the value in the table below.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 Hang 100 grams from the lower end of the spring and again record the position
 of this end.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 Repeat iii.) with loads of 200, 300, 400, and 500 grams hung from the spring.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 Repeat iii.) and iv.) with the second spring.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} 
\backslash 
begin{tabular}{||c|c|c||c|c|c||} 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline Mass suspended & Position & Elongation & Mass suspended & Position
 & Elongation 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 from spring 1 & reading & & from spring 2 & reading & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 (g) & (m) & (m) & (g) & (m) & (m) 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline 0 & & 0 & 0 & & 0 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 100 & & & 100 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 200 & & & 200 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 300 & & & 300 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 400 & & & 400 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 500 & & & 500 & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
end{tabular} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Determine the elongation produced by each load.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item
\protected_separator 
 Plot a curve using the values of the elongation as the ordinates and the
 forces due to the corresponding loads as abscissas for each spring.
 Make sure you use compatible units.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vskip70pt
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Questions:
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What does your curve show about the dependence of each spring's elongation
 upon the applied force?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What are the units of the proportionality constant?
\layout Enumerate

The slope of the lines is known as the force constant, $k$.
 Which spring has the larger force constant? Express in your own words the
 physical implications different size force constants.
\the_end
