#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 10 09:13:12 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Independence of Vertical and Horizontal Motion
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objective:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Determine the relationship between vertical and horizontal motion
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item two coins 
\backslash 
item ruler
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity:} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Place a coin in the far corner of the table nearest the center aisle
 of the room.
 (See figure.) Lay a ruler next to the coin, parallel to the edge of the
 table along the aisle, allowing several centimeters at the end to hang
 over the far edge.
 Place a coin on the portion of the ruler hanging over the edge.
 Hold the ruler in place with a finger one the opposite end.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 272 82
file independence_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item With the ruler held, tap the side of the ruler opposite the coin sharply
 so that the coin on the table will be knocked over the edge of the table.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Both coins should land on the floor.
 Note, by sight or hearing, which hits the ground first.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Sketch the motion of the two coins.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{40pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Questions:}
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
Which coin hit the floor first? Explain.
 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
What was the acceleration of each of the coins? Explain.
 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
Which coin had the greatest initial velocity? Explain.
 
\layout Enumerate

Which coin had the greatest final velocity? Explain
\the_end
