#This file was created by <vineyard> Wed Jul  5 10:47:17 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Measurement of Length, Mass, Volume, and Density
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Learn to measure length with the vernier caliper and mass with the
 platform balance 
\backslash 
item Apply knowledge of units and significant figures 
\backslash 
item Understand the dependence of mass and density on dimensions
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item vernier caliper 
\backslash 
item platform balance 
\backslash 
item set of wooden disks
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity:} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Find the dimensions in centimeters of each of the disks using the vernier
 caliper (see Appendix E).
 Use the averages of three trials for each dimension (diameter, $D$; width,
 $W$) in the calculations of the volumes ($V = 
\backslash 
pi r^2 W$).
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Find the mass, $M$, of each disk using the laboratory balance.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Calculate the density, $
\backslash 
rho$.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} 
\backslash 
begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|} 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
multicolumn{1}{|c||}{} & $D_1$ & $D_2$ & $D_3$ & $W_1$ & $W_2$ & $W_3$ &
 $D$ & $W$ & $V$ & $M$ & $
\backslash 
rho$
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
multicolumn{1}{|c||}{disk} & (cm) & (cm) & (cm) & (cm) & (cm) & (cm) & (cm)
 & (cm) & (cc) & (g) & (g/cc) 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
multicolumn{1}{|c||}{1} & & & & & & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
multicolumn{1}{|c||}{2} & & & & & & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
multicolumn{1}{|c||}{3} & & & & & & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
multicolumn{1}{|c||}{4} & & & & & & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
multicolumn{1}{|c||}{5} & & & & & & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
end{tabular} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Graph mass versus radius and mass versus radius squared.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Questions:}
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
1.
 How does the density depend on the size of a disk? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
2.
 What is the nature of the relationship between mass and radius? What is
 the dependency? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
3.
 What is the smallest part of a centimeter that can be read or estimated
 with a meter stick? With a vernier caliper? Which reading is more reliable?
 Explain.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
4.
 When determining the volume of a disk, which dimension, diameter or width,
 should be measured more carefully? Explain.
 
\layout Standard

5.
 What is the volume of the largest disk in cubic millimeters? In liters?
 What is its mass in kilograms?
\the_end
