#This file was created by <vineyard> Wed Jul  5 09:55:26 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Measurement and Uncertainty
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material have been modified locally and may not have been
 classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

To learn to measure length using a meter stick and a vernier caliper.
 
\layout Itemize

To learn to express the results of measurements with the appropriate number
 of significant figures.
 
\layout Itemize

To learn how to compensate for systematic error in measurements so that
 accuracy can be improved.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Measuring Lengths and Significant Figures
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

We are interested in determining the number of significant figures in length
 measurements you might make.
 How is the number of significant figures determined? Suppose God could
 tell us that the "true" width of a certain car key in centimeters was:
\layout Standard

2.435789345646754456540123544332975774281245623...
 etc.
 
\layout Standard

If we were to measure the key width with a ruler that is lying around the
 lab, the precision of our measurement would be limited by the fact that
 the ruler only has lines marked on it every 0.1 cm.
 We could estimate to the nearest 1/100th of a centimeter how far the key
 edge is from the last mark.
 Thus, we might agree that the best estimate for the width of the key is
 2.44 cm.
 This means we have estimated the key width to three significant figures.
 
\layout Standard

If God announces that the width of a pair of sun glasses is 13.276554577876542677
87...
 cm, then upon direct measurement we might estimate the width to be 13.28
 or 13.27 or 13.26 cm.
 In this case the estimated width is four significant figures.
 Obviously, there is uncertainty about the "true" value of the right-most
 digit.
\layout Standard

The number of significant figures in a measurement is given by the number
 of digits from the most certain digit on the left of the number up to and
 including the first uncertain digit on the right.
 In reporting a number, all digits except the significant digits should
 be dropped.
 (See the discussion of significant figures in Appendix A.)
\layout Standard

Let's do some length measurements to find out what factors might influence
 the number of significant figures in a measurement.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

A meter stick 
\layout Itemize

A vernier caliper 
\layout Itemize

A rectangular board
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Length Measurements with the Meter Stick 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) What factors might make a determination of the "true" length of an object
 measured with the meter stick uncertain? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(b) Measure the width of the board with the meter stick at least seven times
 and create a table in the space below to list the measurements.
 For best results, you should use different regions of the meter stick so
 that, when an average of these measurements is made, non-uniformities in
 the scale will tend to cancel.
 Also, you should avoid using the end of the meter stick which might be
 worn and, therefore, would not be a true zero.
 The apparent change in the reading on the scale due to the position of
 the eye is called parallax, an effect which can introduce error into the
 reading.
 To reduce the uncertainty due to parallax, you should place the meter stick
 on edge so that the scale is close to the object being measured.
 (See Appendix E) 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) In general, when a series of measurements are made, the best estimate
 is the average of those measurements.
 In the space below list the minimum measurement, the maximum measurement,
 and the best estimate for the width of your board.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) How many significant figures should you report in your best estimate?
 Why?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) For your board, what limits the number of significant figures most -
 variation in the actual width of the board or limitations in the accuracy
 of the meter stick? How do you know?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Length Measurements with the Vernier Caliper 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(a) Measure the thickness of the board at least seven times and record the
 results in a table in the space below.
 Make the measurements at different places along each of the two edges.
 If you have questions about how to read the vernier, see Appendix E.
 If you still have questions, consult your instructor.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Record the minimum, maximum, and average of your measurements below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) How many significant figures should you report in your average? Why?
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Calculation of Cross-Sectional Area
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Calculate the cross-sectional area of the board in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) How many significant figures should you report in your result? Why?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
The Inevitability of Uncertainty
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

In common terminology there are three kinds of "errors": (1) mistakes or
 human errors, (2) systematic errors due to measurement or equipment problems
 and (3) inherent uncertainties.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: Error Types
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Give an example of how a person could make a "mistake" or "human error"
 while taking a length measurement.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Give an example of how a systematic error could occur because of the
 condition of the meter stick when a set of length measurements are being
 made.
\layout Standard

(c) What might cause inherent uncertainties in a length measurement?
\the_end
