#This file was created by <vineyard> Sun Jul 16 16:51:55 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

The Period of a Pendulum
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Study the influences on the motion of a simple pendulum 
\backslash 
item Calculate the proportionality constant relating the period of oscillation
 to its determinants
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Introduction:}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent Using dimensional analysis alone, one can predict that the period
 of a simple pendulum would depend not on its mass but on its length and
 the acceleration due to gravity according to the relationship:
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{equation} T 
\backslash 
sim 
\backslash 
sqrt{
\backslash 
frac{L}{g}}.
 
\backslash 
end{equation}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent $T$ is the period, $L$ is the length, and $g$ is the gravitational
 acceleration.
 Let's check this prediction experimentally.
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item string attached to stand 
\backslash 
item collection of masses 
\backslash 
item stop watch 
\backslash 
item meter stick
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity:} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item With $L$ = 1.0 m, place a 1 kg mass at the end of your pendulum.
 Time twenty-five (25) oscillations of amplitude not greater than 10 degrees.
 The period is the total time divided by the number of oscillations.
 Calculate the period and period squared, and enter the relevant data into
 the table below.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Repeat i.
 for masses of 500 g, 200 g, 100 g, 50 g, and 20 g.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item With the 200 g mass, fix the length $L$ to be 1.5 m.
 Time twenty-five (25) oscillations of amplitude not more than 10 degrees.
 Calculate the period and period squared, and enter the relevant data into
 the table below.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Repeat iii.
 for pendulum lengths of 1.0, 0.7, 0.4, 0.25, and 0.15 meters.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} 
\backslash 
begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|} 
\backslash 
hline Trial No.
 & Mass & Length[$L$] & No.
 of & Total Time & Period[$T$] & $T^2$ 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 & (kg) & (m) & Oscillations & (s) & (s) & (s$^2$) 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline 1 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 2 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 3 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 4 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 5 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 6 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 7 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 8 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 9 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 10 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 11 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 12 & & & & & & 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
end{tabular} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Plot $T$ versus mass and $T^2$ versus $L$ on separate graphs.
 Fit the data and determine the slopes of the lines of each graph.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{10pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
slope: period versus mass 
\backslash 
rule{1.5in}{0.2pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{10pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
slope: period$^2$ versus length 
\backslash 
rule{1.5in}{0.2pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{10pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Questions:}
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Interpret the slope of the period versus mass line: What is the relationship
 between mass and period? How does the period depend on the mass? 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Interpret the slope of the period
\latex latex 
$^2$
\latex default 
 versus length line: What is the relationship between length and period?
 How does period depend on pendulum length? 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
If the length of the pendulum were 
\latex latex 
$
\backslash 
frac{1}{16}$
\latex default 
 its original length, by how much would its period change? 
\layout Enumerate

Using the relationship between length and period (equation 1), the slope
 you measured, and the known value of the gravitational acceleration 
\latex latex 
[9.8 $
\backslash 
frac{m}{s^2}$]
\latex default 
, determine the constant of proportionality.
 What are its units?
\the_end
