#This file was created by <vineyard> Fri Jul  7 10:01:26 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Projectile Motion
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material have been modified locally and may not have been
 classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives 
\layout Standard

To understand the experimental and theoretical basis for describing projectile
 motion as the superposition of two independent motions: (1) a body falling
 in the vertical direction, and (2) a body moving in the horizontal direction
 with no forces.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\layout Itemize

A tennis ball.
 
\layout Itemize

A video analysis system (
\shape italic 
Adobe Premier
\shape default 
 and 
\shape italic 
VideoPoint
\shape default 
).
 
\layout Itemize

Graphing and curve fitting software (
\shape italic 
Cricket Graph
\shape default 
).
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Predicting the Two-Dimensional Motion of a Tossed Ball 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Toss a tennis ball up at an angle of about 60
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{\circ } \)
\end_inset 

 with the horizon a couple of times.
 Sketch the motion and describe it in words below.
 What is the shape of the trajectory?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Let's consider the horizontal and vertical components of the motion
 separately.
 What do you think is the horizontal motion of the ball? Is it motion with
 constant velocity? Constant acceleration? Or is it some other kind of motion?
 Hint: What is the force acting on the ball in the horizontal direction
 (after it is released)?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) What do you think is the vertical motion of the ball? Is it motion with
 constant velocity? Constant acceleration? Or is it some other kind of motion?
 Hint: What is the force acting on the ball in the vertical direction (after
 it is released)?
\layout Standard

The two-dimensional motion of a tossed ball is too fast to observe carefully
 by eye without the aid of special instruments.
 In the next activity we will use a video analysis system to study the motion
 of a small ball launched at an angle of about 60
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{\circ } \)
\end_inset 

 with respect to the horizontal.
 You are to use the video analysis software and mathematical modeling techniques
 to find the equations that describe: (a) the trajectory (y vs.
 x), (b) the horizontal motion (x vs.
 t), and (c) the vertical motion (y vs.
 t) of the projectile.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Analyzing Projectile Motion
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Make a movie of a tennis ball in flight by following these steps.
 
\layout Enumerate

Set up the video camera and center the field of view on the region where
 you will toss the ball.
 This region should be about 2 meters from the camera to get a large enough
 area for the flight of the ball.
 Place a ruler or meter stick somewhere in the field-of-view close to the
 plane of the motion of the ball where it won't interfere with the motion.
 This ruler will be user later to determine the scale.
 
\layout Enumerate

Make a movie of the tennis ball flying through the air with a significant
 component of its initial velocity in the horizontal direction (i.e., don't
 toss it straight up).
 Make sure most of the complete trajectory is visible to the camera.
 See 
\series bold 
Appendix D: Video Analysis
\series default 
 for details on making the movie.
 When you save the movie file give it the name 
\shape italic 
Projectile
\shape default 
.
\layout Standard

(b) Determine the position of the projectile at different times during the
 motion.
 To do this task follow the instructions in the second section of 
\series bold 
Appendix D: Video Analysis
\series default 
 for recording and calibrating the position data.
 When you are analyzing the movie place the origin at the position of the
 ball in your first frame.
 Do this by clicking on the arrow symbol on the menu bar to the left of
 the movie frame.
 The cursor will take the shape of an arrow when you place it over the frame.
 Move the point of the cursor's arrow to the origin.
 Click and drag the cursor and move the origin to the position of the ball
 in the first frame and release.
 This sets the origin at the location of the ball at the initial time.
 When you have placed the origin at the desired spot, click on the circular
 icon at the top of the menu bar to the left of the movie frame.
 This returns the cursor to a circle that marks the position of the ball.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Launch 
\shape italic 
Cricket Graph
\shape default 
 and read in the data as described in 
\series bold 
Appendix D
\series default 
.
 See 
\series bold 
Appendix C: Introduction to Cricket Graph
\series default 
 for details on using 
\shape italic 
Cricket Graph
\shape default 
.
 Make a plot of the vertical position (y) versus the horizontal position
 (x).
 Determine the equation that describes the trajectory of the projectile.
 When you have found a good fit to the data, print the graph and attach
 a copy to the unit.
 Write the equation for the trajectory of the projectile in the space below.
 What is the shape of the trajectory? Does the result agree with your earlier
 prediction?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Determine the equation that describes the horizontal motion of the projectil
e by plotting the horizontal position (x) versus time (t) using 
\shape italic 
Cricket Graph
\shape default 
.
 Find a good fit to the data with 
\shape italic 
Cricket Graph
\shape default 
.
 When you have found a good fit to the data, print the graph and attach
 a copy to the unit.
 What kind of motion is it? Does the result agree with your earlier prediction?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The equation for the horizontal component of the motion with proper units
 is: x =
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The horizontal component of the acceleration with proper sign and units
 is: a
\begin_inset Formula \( _{x} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The horizontal component of the initial velocity with proper sign and units
 is: v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0x} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The initial x position with proper units is: x
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Determine the equation that describes the vertical motion of the projectile
 by plotting the vertical position (y) versus time (t).
 Find a good fit to the data.
 When you have found a good fit to the data, print the graph and attach
 a copy to the unit.
 What kind of motion is it? Does the result agree with your earlier prediction?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The equation for the vertical component of the motion with proper units
 is: y =
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The vertical component of the acceleration with proper sign and units is:
 a
\begin_inset Formula \( _{y} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The vertical component of the initial velocity with proper sign and units
 is: v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0y} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
The initial y position with proper units is: y
\begin_inset Formula \( _{0} \)
\end_inset 

 =
\layout Standard

(f) Does it appear that projectile motion is simply the superposition of
 two types of motion that we have already studied? Explain.
\the_end
