#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 17 10:56:27 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Air Column Resonance
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

Adapted from 
\bar under 
Experiments in Physics
\bar default 
, 6th ed., B.
 Cioffari, D.
 Edmonds, Jr.
 D.
 C.
 Heath and Co., 1978.
\end_float 
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Measure the wavelengths in air of sound waves of different frequencies.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Determine the velocity of sound in air.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
bf Introduction} The velocity of a wave is directly proportional to both
 the frequency of vibration and the length of the wave,
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{equation} v = 
\backslash 
lambda f 
\backslash 
end{equation}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent A tuning fork held over the open end of a tube will send air disturbanc
es (compressions and rarefactions) down the length of the tube.
 As the medium changes at the other end of the tube, the disturbances will
 be reflected.
 Should these reflections be in phase with the waves generated by the tuning
 fork, resonance occurs, that is, the disturbances reinforce one another
 and produce a louder sound.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent In order that the tube resonate, the frequency of the vibrating
 air must coincide with the natural frequency of the tube (which may be
 its fundamental or one of its overtones).
 For a tube like the one used in this experiment, which is closed at the
 opposite end, this requirement is met if the tube length is an odd number
 of quarter wavelengths of the sound waves produced by the fork ($l = 
\backslash 
lambda/4, 3 
\backslash 
lambda/4, 5 
\backslash 
lambda/4$, etc., where $l$ is the length of the tube and $
\backslash 
lambda$ is the wave length of the sound).
 Note that if the length of the tube is gradually increased while the fork
 is vibrating, the distance between successive resonance positions is $
\backslash 
lambda/2$.
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
small {
\backslash 
bf Note:} Due to edge effects at the open end of a tube, the length of the
 wave depends on the radius of the opening.
 Thus, $l_{eff} = l + 0.6r$, where $l_{eff}$ is the $effective$~ length,
 $l$ is the length measured, and $r$ is the tube radius.} 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent By raising and lowering a brass tube inserted vertically into a
 larger plastic tube filled with water, column length may be varied.
 The (effective) length at resonance gives the wavelength; the tuning fork
 frequency gives the sound frequency.
 Formula 1 then gives the velocity.
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item resonance tube setup 
\backslash 
item 2 tuning forks of different pitches 
\backslash 
item meter stick 
\backslash 
item rubber hammer 
\backslash 
item thermometer
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity:} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Determine the shortest tube length for resonance.
 Start the tuning fork vibrating by striking it gently with the rubber hammer.
 Be sure the brass tube is in its lowest position and the fork extends over
 the open end in such a manner that the prongs vibrate vertically.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Slowly raise the brass tube until the first position of resonance is
 reached.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Measure and record the distance from the open end of the tube to the
 water level in the plastic tube.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Raise the tube until the next position of resonance is reached and
 measure and record the distance as before.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Continue with a third position of resonance.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Repeat 1- 5 with the same fork to twice more for a total of three independe
nt measurements of resonance positions.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Repeat 1- 6 with a second tuning fork of a different frequency.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vskip35pt
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
Large{
\backslash 
bf DATA}} 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent Room Temperature ($^
\backslash 
circ$C) 
\backslash 
hrulefill 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 

\protected_separator 
 Tube radius (m) 
\backslash 
hrulefill
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} 
\backslash 
begin{tabular}{||c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c||} 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline Tuning Fork & 
\backslash 
multicolumn{4}{|c|}{First Position of} & 
\backslash 
multicolumn{4}{|c|}{Second Position} & 
\backslash 
multicolumn{4}{|c|}{Third Position of} & Wave- & Velocity of 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 Frequency, & 
\backslash 
multicolumn{4}{|c|}{Resonance, m} & 
\backslash 
multicolumn{4}{|c|}{of Resonance, m} & 
\backslash 
multicolumn{4}{|c|}{Resonance, m} & length, & Sound in 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
cline{2-13} Hz & 1 & 2 & 3 & Ave.
 & 1 & 2 & 3 & Ave.
 & 1 & 2 & 3 & Ave.
 & m & air, m/s 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline &&&&&&&&&&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline &&&&&&&&&&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
end{tabular} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent Average Velocity of Sound in Air (m/s) 
\backslash 
hfill 
\backslash 
rule{2cm}{1pt} 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Analysis:} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item For each (effective) length of resonating air column, calculate the
 average of the three readings.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item For each tuning fork, determine the value of the wavelength of its
 sound wave in air from the average lengths of the resonating column.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Using the tuning fork frequency and the calculated wavelength, determine
 the velocity of sound in air.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item The velocity of sound in air at $0^
\backslash 
circ$C is 331.4 m/s.
 Determine the dependence of the velocity of sound in air on the temperature
 [how many m/s does the velocity change for each degree C?].
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item The temperature dependence of sound velocity in air is given by $v(T)
 = 331.4 + 0.6T$, where $T$ is in $^
\backslash 
circ$C and $v$ is in m/s.
 Within what percent error is your experimental result?
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent{
\backslash 
bf Questions:} 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Suppose that, in this experiment, room temperature had been lower.
 How would the length of the resonating air column have changed? Explain.
 
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
How would an atmosphere of hydrogen affect the pitch of a tuning fork? Explain.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
A tuning fork rated at 128 vibrations per second is held over a resonance
 tube.
 What are the two shortest distances at which resonance will occur at a
 temperature of 
\latex latex 
$20^
\backslash 
circ$
\latex default 
C?
\layout Enumerate

The first resonance of a tube is found to occur when the position of the
 water line below a vibrating tuning fork is at 10 cm.
 A second resonance is found at 26 cm.
 What is the frequency of the tuning fork? (Take the air temperature to
 be 20
\latex latex 
$^
\backslash 
circ$
\latex default 
C.)
\the_end
