#This file was created by <vineyard> Tue Jul 11 17:40:59 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Rolling
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives 
\layout Standard

To apply our understanding of rotation to the case of rolling without skidding
 and discover its fundamental properties.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\layout Itemize

A spool for rolling.
 
\layout Itemize

A meter stick and a ruler 
\layout Itemize

A video analysis system (Adobe Premier and VideoPoint).
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Overview 
\layout Standard

We have extensively studied the linear motion of objects and we recently
 began the study of rotational motion.
 When something rolls it is combining both types of motion in one.
 In addition, the motion requires a unique application of forces and it
 has some surprising characteristics that are often poorly understood.
 In this unit we will investigate these unique features.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Rolling - Guesses and Predictions 
\layout Standard

To begin our investigation consider the following questions.
 You might find it useful to test some of your answers by simply rolling
 the spool along the table and observing its motion.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
In your own words, what is rolling?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
How is the rotational motion related to the linear motion?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
Make a sketch of the spool rolling and the forces acting on the spool.
 What is the effect, if any, of friction? How would the motion change if
 there was no friction in the system at all?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Investigating Rolling
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Make a movie of the spool rolling along your laboratory table by following
 these steps.
 
\layout Enumerate

Turn the camera on and point it along the long axis of your table.
 The camera should be around 1 m from where you will roll the spool along
 the surface of the table.
 Place a ruler somewhere in the field-of-view where it won't interfere with
 the motion and parallel to one edge of the field-of-view.
 This ruler will be user later to determine the scale.
 
\layout Enumerate

Practice rolling the spool in front of the camera a few times to make sure
 the camera is pointing so there is no change in the vertical position of
 the center of the spool as it moves across the camera's field-of-view.
 Make a movie of the spool rolling at a constant speed along the table.
 See 
\series bold 
Appendix D: Video Analysis
\series default 
 for details on making the movie.
\layout Standard

(b) Determine the position of a point on the rim of the spool and the center
 of the spool during the motion.
 To do this task follow the instructions in 
\series bold 
Appendix D: Video Analysis
\series default 
 for creating and calibrating movie data.
 On each frame click first on the point on the rim and then on the center.
 Make sure the vertical position of the center did not change much during
 the movie.
 If it did, check the orientation of your camera and retake the movie.
 The file should contain five columns with the values of time, x and y positions
 of the point on the rim, and x and y positions of the center of the spool.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
(c) Create a plot of the horizontal position of the center of the spool
 versus time.
 See 
\series bold 
Appendix C: Introduction to Cricket Graph
\series default 
 for more details.
 Fit your data and extract the speed of the center of the spool.
 Print your plot and attach it to your write-up.
 Measure the radius of the spool.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
v
\begin_inset Formula \( _{spool} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 
r
\begin_inset Formula \( _{spool} \)
\end_inset 

 = 
\hfill 

\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
(d) What is the general expression for the angular displacement of the point
 on the rim relative to the center of the spool in terms of the x and y
 positions that you recorded above? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 

\begin_inset Formula \( \theta _{rim}= \)
\end_inset 

 
\layout Standard

(e) We want to graph the angular displacement of the point on the rim relative
 to the center as a function of time.
 To do this:
\layout Enumerate

Calculate the angular displacement 
\begin_inset Formula \( \theta _{rim} \)
\end_inset 

 in radians for the first row in the Data window of Cricket Graph.
 Record the result here.
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\theta _{1}=\]

\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate

Calculating the angular position for all the data as we just did would be
 horribly tedious.
 However, we can take advantage of 
\shape italic 
Cricket Graph's
\shape default 
 spreadsheet capabilities to speed things up.
 To enter an equation for column 6 in the 
\shape italic 
Cricket Graph
\shape default 
 Data window double click on the box at the top of column 6 that has the
 lone "6" in it.
 The cursor will now appear in the box at the very top of the 
\series bold 
Data
\series default 
 window.
 In that window use the following syntax to calculate the angular position,
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
=ATAN2(C2-C4,C3-C5)\]

\end_inset 

 where C2 refers to column 2 that contains the x values of the point on
 the rim, C3 refers to column 3 that contains the y values of the point
 on the rim, C4 refers to the center of the spool's x value, and C5 refers
 to the center of the spool's y value.
 The function "ATAN2" calculates the inverse tangent from the ratio of the
 two arguments.
 Hit the "Enter" key when you are done.
 You may find the column that contains the results of your calculation has
 a numeric format that is difficult to read.
 You can adjust the number of significant digits that are displayed by clicking
 on the number at the top of the column of interest and then highlighting
 
\series bold 
Numeric Format
\series default 
 under the 
\series bold 
Options
\series default 
 menu of 
\shape italic 
Cricket Graph
\shape default 
.
 You will be presented with a pop-up window with choices for the number
 of significant digits to be displayed.
 
\layout Enumerate

Does the value of the first row agree with the calculation you made in part
 (2) above? If it does not check both calculations again.
 If that fails consult your instructor.
 
\layout Enumerate

Graph the angular displacement (column 6) as a function of time (column
 1).
 You will see discontinuous jumps in your data because the function you
 used in part (3) always calculates angles in the range -
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi  \)
\end_inset 

 to 
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi  \)
\end_inset 

.
 You must add different increments of 2
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi  \)
\end_inset 

, 4
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi  \)
\end_inset 

, etc.
 to adjust the scale of the angular displacement.
 Do this, print your plot and attach it to your write-up.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 5mm 
(f) Fit your graph of the angular displacement versus time and extract the
 angular speed.
 Calculate the ratio of the speed of the center of the spool and the angular
 speed.
 What are the units of this ratio? Is it close in value to any property
 of the spool? Is it related to any property of the spool? Why?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 

\begin_inset Formula \( \omega _{rim}= \)
\end_inset 


\hfill 
 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{spool}/\omega _{rim}= \)
\end_inset 


\hfill 

\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(g) Make a plot of the vertical and horizontal components of the position
 of the point on the rim as a function of time.
 Attach a copy of your plot to the unit.
 What is the speed of the point on the rim when it is in contact with the
 table? Explain.
\layout Standard

(h) How would you define rolling now? What is the role of friction?
\the_end
