#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 17 10:45:26 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Waves in a String
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item The relation between tension and wavelength in a vibrating string 
\backslash 
item The difference between particle and propagation speeds 
\backslash 
item The characteristics of transverse and longitudinal waves
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
bf Introduction} Wave motion is the mechanism by which a disturbance propagates
 from its point of creation.
 It is not material objects but energy that is transported by waves.
 When the particle motion is perpendicular to the direction of propagation,
 the waves are called transverse.
 When the motion is parallel (and anti-parallel) to the direction of propagation
, the waves are called longitudinal.
 Propagation through angular displacements or rotations is called torsional.
 
\backslash 

\backslash 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item string vibrator and pulley 
\backslash 
item string 
\backslash 
item two-meter stick 
\backslash 
item weight hanger and masses 
\backslash 
item slinky
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} {
\backslash 
bf Investigation 1: Standing Waves in Strings} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent {
\backslash 
bf Discussion} Stretched strings can vibrate in many modes: a single segment
 (string length equals one half the wavelength of the vibration); two segments,
 with a node at each end and one in the middle (string length equals one
 wavelength); and so forth.
 In all cases, when the waves are stationary (or standing), the length of
 the string is a whole number of half wavelengths.
 Such a condition, known as resonance, occurs when a series of waves reflects
 at the end of the string and interferes with the incoming waves.
 Then, the two trains of waves have the same wavelength, velocity, and amplitude
, but travel in opposite directions in the same medium.
 For a particular wavelength, $
\backslash 
lambda$, a relationship exists between the frequency of vibration, $f$,
 and the wave (or propagation) speed, $v$:
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{equation} v = f
\backslash 
lambda.
 
\backslash 
end{equation}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
It turns out that the speed is given by:
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{equation} v =
\protected_separator 
 
\backslash 
sqrt{
\backslash 
frac{T}{
\backslash 
mu}}, 
\backslash 
end{equation}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent where $T$ is the string tension in newtons and $
\backslash 
mu$ is the mass per unit length of the string in kilograms per meter.
 Combining equations 1 and 2 we find:
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{equation} 
\backslash 
lambda = 
\backslash 
frac{1}{f}
\backslash 
sqrt{
\backslash 
frac{T}{
\backslash 
mu}}= 2L, 
\backslash 
end{equation}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
noindent where $L$ is the length of one vibrating segment, or distance between
 consecutive nodes.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity:} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Measure and record the length and mass of the string.
 Compute its mass per unit length in kilograms per meter.
 Record the frequency of the vibrator (marked on bottom of stand).
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Fasten one end of the string to the vibrator (tuning fork) armature,
 pass the string over the pulley, and attach a weight hanger to the other
 end.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Turn on the power supply and set it to 8 volts.
 Adjust the set screw until the fork vibrates and then tighten the lock
 nut to prevent creeping.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Add weights to the hanger until the string vibrates in two segments.
 Adjust the tension by adding or removing small weights until the loops
 of the standing wave formed in the string are of maximum width.
 Fine adjustments to the distance between vibrator and pulley (done carefully)
 might help maximize the amplitude.
 Measure and record this amplitude at the position of its greatest value.
 Record the mass of the weights, then calculate and record the tension and
 the square root of the tension.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Measure the distance from the point where the string makes contact
 with the pulley to the first node beyond the vibrator.
 One can grasp the node with thumb and forefinger and turn off the power
 supply to get an accurate distance measurement, but do not pull on the
 string thereby increasing its length.
 Divide this length by the number of segments included (one less than the
 total number of segments), and record the length of one segment.
 Calculate and record the corresponding wavelength.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Repeat steps iv.
 and v.
 (should weights now be added or removed?) to get 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 segments
 in turn.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Plot wavelength (ordinate) vs.
 $
\backslash 
sqrt{T}$ (abscissa).
 Determine the slope of a straight line fit to the data and from this obtain
 the average frequency of your observations.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Using your measurements for the maximum amplitude and your determination
 of the average frequency, calculate and enter into your table for each
 set of observations the average speed at the position of the maximum amplitude
 of the point vibrating back and forth.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center} 
\backslash 
begin{tabular}{||p{.5in}|c|c|c|p{.5in}|p{.5in}|c|p{.55in}|p{.55in}||} 
\backslash 
hline $
\backslash 
sharp$ of segments & 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 $m$ 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 & 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 $T$ 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 & 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 $
\backslash 
sqrt{T}$ 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 & wave velocity & segment length & 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 $
\backslash 
lambda$ 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 & max.
 amplitude & ave.
 particle velocity at antinode 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 & (kg) & (n) & (n$^{1/2}$) & 
\backslash 
 (m/s) & 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 (m) & (m) & 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 
\backslash 
 (m) & 
\backslash 
 (m/s) 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline
\backslash 
hline 2 &&&&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 3 &&&&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 4 &&&&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 5 &&&&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 6 &&&&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 7 &&&&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline 8 &&&&&&&& 
\backslash 

\backslash 
 
\backslash 
hline
\backslash 
hline 
\backslash 
end{tabular} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Questions:
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Should the line you fit to the data in part 7 pass through the origin? What
 does this mean physically?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Did your average frequency agree with the known value? What was the percent
 error?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Can you identify a relationship between the average speed at the point of
 maximum amplitude and the propagation (wave) speed.
 Explain.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What is the minimum back-and-forth speed of a point on the string?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
On what does the point (or particle) speed depend?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Why were you instructed not to include the segment between the vibrator
 and the first node in you measurement of segment length?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What would happen in this experiment if very elastic string were used?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What is meant by resonance?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Upon what physical properties do a) the loudness, b) the pitch, and c) the
 quality of a musical tone depend?
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
begin{center}{
\backslash 
bf Investigation 2: Longitudinal Waves} 
\backslash 
end{center}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity:
\layout Enumerate

With the slinky, generate compression and rarefaction displacements by moving
 one end back and forth.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
How can one generate a pure compression pulse along the slinky? A pure rarefacti
on pulse? See if you can generate these.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Questions:
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
In order to get both compression and rarefaction, what is the displacement
 of the end
\backslash 
 relative to the zero (equilibrium) position?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
How can you create asymmetric pulses in a string?
\layout Enumerate

What differences are there between transverse waves (waves in a string)
 and longitudinal waves? Consider the motion of points in each medium and
 what characteristics media must have to produce either kind of wave.
\the_end
