#This file was created by <vineyard> Wed Jul  5 13:49:25 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

The Tossed Ball
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Objectives:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Application of the free-fall concept 
\backslash 
item Investigation of linear motion in two directions with constant acceleration
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Introduction}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent In the Free Fall investigation, you determined the acceleration
 of objects allowed to fall from rest.
 In this lab you will study this sort of motion with an initial velocity.}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
medskip
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Predictions}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent If you throw a ball straight up into the air, releasing it at the
 level of the table-top with enough velocity so that it just reaches the
 top of a two-meter stick resting on the floor, how long will the ball's
 flight take from its release until it hits the floor? List all your assumptions
 and the measurements you will make, and show all your calculations in making
 this prediction.}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{100pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Apparatus:} 
\backslash 
begin{list}{$
\backslash 
bullet$}{
\backslash 
itemsep0pt 
\backslash 
parsep0pt}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item 2-meter stick 
\backslash 
item tennis ball 
\backslash 
item 2 stop watches
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{list}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Activity:} 
\backslash 
begin{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item To test your predictions, stand the two-meter stick on its end.
 One of the experimenters should be positioned to view the high end of the
 stick.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item A second experimenter throws the ball up in such a way that the ball
 is released at the level of the table-top and just reaches the top of the
 two-meter stick.
 You might try grasping the table-edge with your non-throwing arm extended
 out over the floor.
 Throw from under this extended arm, releasing the ball as your two arms
 make contact.
 One or more stop watches should be started at the instant of release.
 Repeat as necessary until the maximum height of the ball is as close to
 two-meters as possible.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
item Time the flight of the ball from its release until it hits the floor.
 When you get a good toss, record the value and compare it to your prediction.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
end{enumerate}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
bigskip
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent Time predicted 
\backslash 
rule{1.75in}{0.2pt} 
\backslash 
hspace{10pt} Time measured 
\backslash 
rule{1.75in}{0.2pt}}
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Standard


\latex latex 
{
\backslash 
noindent 
\backslash 
bf Questions:}
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
You throw a ball straight up in the air.
 Some time later, the ball falls to the ground.
 Is the acceleration constant during the entire flight of the ball? Explain.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What is (are) the value(s) and direction(s) of the acceleration at the instant
 the ball is released? At its highest point? On the way down? Just before
 it hits the floor?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Does your measurement agree with your prediction? Explain any discrepancy.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What was the initial velocity of the ball?
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What was the ball's velocity when it reached the level of the table-top
 on its way down?
\layout Enumerate

What was the ball's velocity when it hit the ground?
\the_end
