#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 24 15:20:21 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Measuring and Graphing Horizontal Motion
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material have been modified locally and may not have been
 classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard
\align center 
Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

To explore the nature of horizontal motion.
 
\layout Itemize

To learn to use Cricket Graph for graphing and fitting data.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Measuring the Horizontal Motion of a Bowling Ball
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

A key to understanding how to describe motion near the surface of the earth
 is to observe horizontal motions and vertical motions separately.
 Eventually, situations in which an object undergoes both horizontal and
 vertical motion can be analyzed and understood as a combination of these
 two kinds of basic motions.
\layout Standard

Lets start with horizontal motion.
 How do you think the horizontal position of a bowling ball changes over
 time as it rolls along on a smooth surface? For example, suppose you were
 to roll the ball a distance of 6.0 meters on a fairly level smooth floor.
 Do you expect that the ball would: (1) move at a steady speed, (2) speed
 up, or (3) slow down? To observe the horizontal motion of a "bowling ball"
 you can use a bocce ball which is slightly smaller but quite similar to
 a regulation bowling ball.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

A bocce ball 
\layout Itemize

3 stop watches 
\layout Itemize

A 2-meter stick 
\layout Itemize

Masking tape for marking distances 
\layout Itemize

A smooth level surface (> 7 meters in length)
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Horizontal Motion 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) What do you predict will happen to the position of the ball as a function
 of time? Will the ball move at a steady speed, speed up, or slow down after
 it leaves the bowler's hand? Why?
\layout Standard

(b) Find a 7 meter length of smooth floor and use masking tape to mark off
 a starting line and distances of 2.00 m, 4.00 m, and 6.00 m.
 from the starting line.
 Then: (1) Bowl the ball along the surface.
 (2) Measure the time it takes to travel 2.0 m, 4.0 m & 6.0 m.
 (3) Record the results in the table below.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Note:
\series default 
 This is a cooperative project.
 You will need a bowler, three people to measure the times, and someone
 to stop the ball.
 Practice several times before recording data in the table below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center \LyXTable
multicol5
5 2 0 0 -1 -1 -1 -1
1 1 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 1 0 0
8 1 0 "" ""
8 1 1 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""
0 8 1 0 0 0 0 "" ""

t (s)
\newline 
x (m)
\newline 
0.00
\newline 
0.00
\newline 

\newline 

\newline 

\newline 

\newline 

\newline 

\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Calculate the average speed, v, in m/s of the bowling ball as it travels
 the 6.00 meters.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Graphing the Horizontal Motion
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

In this activity, you should graph your data for the position of the ball
 as a function of the rolling-time of the ball.
 This graphing should be done both by hand and on the computer.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Drawing a Graph of Position vs.
 Time
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Fill in the units and the scale numbers in the graph below and plot
 the data you collected.
 You should plot a "fourth" data point on your graph by reasoning out what
 rolling-time you would measure for your ball if you were to roll it a distance
 of zero meters.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 203 161
file measuring_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(b) Now use Cricket Graph on the computer to create the same graph.
 See Appendix C for instructions.
 Print the graph and insert a copy in your notebook at the end of this unit.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
How does the Position of the Ball Vary with Time?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

We are interested in the mathematical nature of the relationship between
 position and time for rolling on a level surface.
 Some definitions of mathematical relationships are shown in the sketches
 below.
 Figure (a) shows a function y that increases with x so that y = f(x).
 In sketch (b) y is a linear function that increases with x so that y =
 mx + b, where m is the slope and b is the y intercept.
 In figure (c) y is proportional to x (y = mx where b = 0).
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 419 146
file measuring_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: The Mathematical Relationships
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) By comparing the shape of the graph you have just produced with the
 sketches shown above, would you say that the position, x, increases with
 time, t? Decreases with time? Is it a linear function of t? Is it proportional
 to t? Explain.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) How do the results compare with the prediction you made in Activity
 1? Are you surprised?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) What do you think would happen to the slope, m, of the graph, if the
 ball had been rolled faster? Would it increase? Decrease? Stay the same?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: Mathematical Modeling
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Create a mathematical model of the bowling ball motion data you collected
 in Activity 1.
 This can be done by using Cricket Graph to fit the data with a line.
 See Appendix C for instructions.
 Be sure to label the graph.
 Then print it and insert a copy into your notebook.
 Does the line provide a good description of the data?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Write the equation describing the motion in the form Position (m) =
 ( ? m/s) Time (s) + ( ? m).
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Compare the slope of the line with the average speed you calculated
 in Activity 1.
 A good way to do this is by calculating the % difference between the two
 (See Appendix A).
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Give a brief discussion of the meaning of the slope of a graph of Position
 vs.
 Time.
 What does it tell you?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Homework
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

The diagram below shows the graphs of three possible relationships between
 the time, t, in seconds and the position, x, in centimeters that the object
 has traveled.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 192 146
file measuring_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Which graphs represent position as a linear function of time? A, B,
 and/or C?
\layout Standard

(b) Which graphs, if any, show position as proportional to time?
\the_end
