#This file was created by <vineyard> Fri Jul  7 16:03:37 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

The Electrical and Gravitational Forces
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material have been modified locally and may not have been
 classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Quote

I began to think of gravity extending to the orb of the moon, and .
 .
 .
 I deduced that the forces which keep the planets in their orbs must be
 reciprocally as the squares of their distances from the centers about which
 they revolve: and thereby compared the force requisite to keep the moon
 in her orb with the force of gravity at the surface of the earth, and found
 them to answer pretty nearly.
 All this was in the two plague years of 1665 and 1666, for in those days
 I was in the prime of my age for invention, and minded mathematics and
 philosophy more than at any time since.
 - Isaac Newton 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objective 
\layout Standard

To understand the similarities of the gravitational and electrical forces.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Overview 
\layout Standard

The enterprise of physics is concerned ultimately with mathematically describing
 the fundamental forces of nature.
 Nature offers us several fundamental forces, which include a strong force
 that holds the nuclei of atoms together, a weak force that helps us describe
 certain kinds of radioactive decay in the nucleus, the force of gravity,
 and the electromagnetic force.
 
\layout Standard


\shape italic 
Two kinds of force dominate our everyday reality-the gravitational force
 acting between masses and the Coulomb force acting between electrical charges.

\shape default 
 The gravitational force allows us to describe mathematically how objects
 near the surface of the earth are attracted toward the earth and how the
 moon revolves around the earth and planets revolve around the sun.
 The genius of Newton was to realize that objects as diverse as falling
 apples and revolving planets are both moving under the action of the same
 gravitational force.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 340 151
file elec_grav_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Similarly, the Coulomb force allows us to describe how one charge "falls"
 toward another or how an electron orbits a proton in a hydrogen atom.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 306 131
file elec_grav_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The fact that both the Coulomb and the gravitational forces lead to objects
 falling and to objects orbiting around each other suggests that these forces
 might have the same mathematical form.
 
\layout Standard

In this unit we will explore the mathematical symmetry between electrical
 and gravitational forces for two reasons.
 First, it is beautiful to behold the unity that nature offers us as we
 use the same type of mathematics to predict the motion of planets and galaxies,
 the falling of objects, the flow of electrons in circuits, and the nature
 of the hydrogen atom and of other chemical elements.
 Second, what you have already learned about the influence of the gravitational
 force on a mass can be applied to aid your understanding of the forces
 on charged particles.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Comparison of Electrical and Gravitational Forces 
\layout Standard

Let's start our discussion of this comparison with the familiar expression
 of the Coulomb force exerted on charge 1 by charge 2.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 418 166
file elec_grav_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Charles Coulomb did his experimental investigations of this force in the
 18th century by exploring the forces between two small charged spheres.
 Much later, in the 20th century, Coulomb's law enabled scientists to design
 cyclotrons and other types of accelerators for moving charged particles
 in circular orbits at high speeds.
 
\layout Standard

Newton's discovery of the universal law of gravitation came the other way
 around.
 He thought about orbits first.
 This was back in the 17th century, long before Coulomb began his studies.
 A statement of Newton's universal law of gravitation describing the force
 experienced by mass 1 due to the presence of mass 2 is shown below in modern
 mathematical notation: 
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 412 165
file elec_grav_fig4.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

About the time that Coulomb did his experiments with electrical charges
 in the 18th century, one of his contemporaries, Henry Cavendish, did a
 direct experiment to determine the nature of the gravitational force between
 two spherical masses in a laboratory.
 This confirmed Newton's gravitational force law and allowed him to determine
 the gravitational constant, G.
 A fact emerges that is quite amazing.
 Both types of forces, electrical and gravitational, are very similar.
 Essentially the same mathematics can be used to describe orbital and linear
 motions due to either electrical or gravitational interactions of the tiniest
 fundamental particles or the largest galaxies.
 This statement needs to be qualified a bit when electrons, protons and
 other fundamental particles are considered.
 A new field called quantum mechanics was developed in the early part of
 this century to take into account the wave nature of matter, which we don't
 actually study in introductory physics.
 However, even in wave mechanical calculations electrical forces like those
 shown above are used.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: The Electrical vs.
 the Gravitational Force
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Examine the mathematical expression for the two force laws.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) What is the same about the two force laws?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) What is different? For example, is the force between two like masses
 attractive or repulsive? How about two like charges? What part of each
 equation determines whether the like charges or masses are attractive or
 repulsive?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Do you think negative mass could exist? If there is negative mass, would
 two negative masses attract or repel?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Which Force is Stronger-- Electrical or Gravitational?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Gravitational forces hold the planets in our solar system in orbit and account
 for the motions of matter in galaxies.
 Electrical forces serve to hold atoms and molecules together.
 If we consider two of the most common fundamental particles, the electron
 and the proton, how do their electrical and gravitational forces compare
 with each other?
\layout Standard

Let's peek into the hydrogen atom and compare the gravitational force on
 the electron due to interaction of its mass with that of the proton to
 the electrical force between the two particles as a result of their charge.
 In order to do the calculation you'll need to use some well known constants.
\layout Standard

Electron: m
\begin_inset Formula \( _{e} \)
\end_inset 

 = 9.1 x 10
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{-31} \)
\end_inset 

 kg, q
\begin_inset Formula \( _{e} \)
\end_inset 

 = - 1.6 x 10
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{-19} \)
\end_inset 

 C 
\layout Standard

Proton: m
\begin_inset Formula \( _{p} \)
\end_inset 

 = 1.7 x 10
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{-27} \)
\end_inset 

 kg, q
\begin_inset Formula \( _{p} \)
\end_inset 

 = +1.6 x 10
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{-19} \)
\end_inset 

 C 
\layout Standard

Distance between the electron and proton: r = 1.0 x 10
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{-10} \)
\end_inset 

 m
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: The Electrical vs.
 the Gravitational Force in the Hydrogen Atom
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Calculate the magnitude of the electrical force on the electron.
 Is it attractive or repulsive?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Calculate the magnitude of the gravitational force on the electron.
 Is it attractive or repulsive?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Which is larger? By what factor (i.e.
 what is the ratio)?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Which force are you more aware of on a daily basis? If your answer does
 not agree with that in part (c), explain why.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: The Gravitational Force of the Earth
\layout Standard

(a) Use Newton's law to show that the magnitude of the acceleration due
 to gravity on an object of mass at a height h above the surface of the
 earth is given by the following expression.
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{GM_{e}}{\left( R_{e}+h\right) ^{2}}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Hint: Because of the spherical symmetry of the Earth you can treat the mass
 of the Earth as if it were all concentrated at a point at the Earth's center.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(b) Calculate the acceleration due to gravity of a mass m at the surface
 of the earth (h=0).
 The radius of the earth is R
\begin_inset Formula \( _{e} \)
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \( \approx  \)
\end_inset 

 6.38 x 10
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{3} \)
\end_inset 

 km and its mass M
\begin_inset Formula \( _{e} \)
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \( \approx  \)
\end_inset 

 5.98 x 10
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{24} \)
\end_inset 

 kg.
 Does the result look familiar? How is this acceleration related to the
 gravitational acceleration g?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Use the equation you derived in part (a) to calculate the acceleration
 due to gravity at the ceiling of the room you are now in.
 How does it differ from the value at the floor? Can you measure the difference
 in the lab using the devices available?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Suppose you travel halfway to the moon.
 What is the new value of the acceleration? Can you measure the difference?
 (Recall that the earth-moon distance is about 384,000 km.)
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Is the gravitational acceleration "constant", g, really a constant?
 Explain.
\layout Standard

(f) In part (d) you showed that there is a significant gravitational attraction
 halfway between the earth and the moon.
 Why, then, do astronauts experience weightlessness when they are orbiting
 a mere 120 km above the earth?
\the_end
