#This file was created by <vineyard> Sat Jul  8 13:09:37 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Work and Power
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material have been modified locally and may not have been
 classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives 
\layout Itemize

To extend the intuitive notion of work as physical effort to a formal mathematic
al definition of work as a function of force and distance.
 
\layout Itemize

To understand the concept of power and its relationship to work.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus 
\layout Itemize

Spring scale 
\layout Itemize

Wooden block with hook 
\layout Itemize

Variety of masses
\layout Standard

The Concept of Physical Work 
\layout Standard

Suppose you are president of the Richmond Load 'n' Go Co.
 A local college has three jobs available and will allow you to choose which
 one you want before offering the other two jobs to rival companies.
 All three jobs pay the same amount of money.
 Which one would you choose for your crew?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 445 166
file work_power_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Activity 1: Choosing Your Job 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
Examine the descriptions of the jobs shown in figure above.
 Which one would you be most likely to choose? Least likely to choose? Explain
 the reasons for your answer.
\layout Standard

You obviously want to do the least amount of work for the most money.
 Before you reconsider your answers later in this unit, you should do a
 series of activities to get a better feel for what physicists mean by work
 and how the president of Load 'n' Go can make top dollar.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 197 70
file work_power_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

In everyday language we refer to doing work whenever we expend effort.
 In order to get an intuitive feel for how we might define work mathematically,
 you should experiment with moving your textbook back and forth along a
 table top and a rougher surface such as a carpeted floor.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: This is Work!
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Pick a distance of a meter or so.
 Sense how much effort it takes to push a heavy book that distance.
 How much more effort does it take to push it twice as far? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Pile another similar book on top of the original one and sense how much
 effort it takes to push the two books through the distance you picked.
 Comment below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) From your study of sliding friction, what is the relationship between
 the mass of a sliding object and the friction force it experiences? On
 the basis of your experience with sliding friction, estimate how much more
 force you have to apply to push two books compared to one book.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) If the "effort" it takes to move an object is associated with physical
 work, guess an equation that can be used to define work mathematically
 when the force on an object and its displacement (i.e., the distance it moves)
 lie along the same line.
\layout Standard

In physics, work is not simply effort.
 In fact, the physicist's definition of work is precise and mathematical.
 In order to have a full understanding of how work is defined in physics,
 we need to consider its definition in a very simple situation and then
 enrich it later to include more realistic situations.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
A Simple Definition of Physical Work:
\series default 
 If an object that is moving in a straight line experiences a constant force
 in the direction of its motion during the time it is undergoing a displacement,
 the work done by the external force , F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

, is defined as the product of the force and the displacement of the object.
 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
W=F_{ext}\Delta x\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

where W represents the work done by the external force, F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{ext} \)
\end_inset 

 is the magnitude of the force, and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

x the displacement of the object.
 Work done by a force is always positive!
\layout Standard

What if the force of interest and the displacement are in the opposite direction
? For instance, what about the work done against the force of sliding friction,
 F
\begin_inset Formula \( _{f} \)
\end_inset 

, when a block slides down an inclined plane as a result of the gravitational
 force? In this case we refer to work done against a force.
 This is given by
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
W_{against}=-F_{f}\Delta x\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Work done against a force is always negative!
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Applying the Physics Definition of Work
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Does effort necessarily result in physical work? Suppose two guys are
 in an evenly match tug of war.
 They are obviously expending effort to pull on the rope, but according
 to the definition of physical work, are they doing any physical work? Explain.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 291 109
file work_power_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) A wooden block with a mass of .30 kg is pushed along a sheet of ice that
 has no friction with a constant external force of 10 N which acts in a
 horizontal direction.
 After it moves a distance of 0.40 m how much work has been done on the block
 by the external force?
\layout Standard

(c) The same wooden block with a mass of .30 kg is pushed along a table with
 a constant external force of 10 N which acts in a horizontal direction.
 It moves a distance of 0.40 m.
 However, there is a friction force opposing its motion.
 Assume that the coefficient of sliding friction, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \mu _{k} \)
\end_inset 

, is 0.20.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 186 58
file work_power_fig4.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
According to the definitions of work done by a force and work done against
 a force, what is the work associated with the external force? Is work done
 by this force or against it? Is the work positive or negative? Show your
 calculations.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
According to the definitions of work, what is the work associated with the
 friction force? Is work done by the friction force or against it? Is the
 work positive or negative? Show your calculations.
\layout Standard

(d) Suppose you lift a 0.3 kg object through a distance of 1.0 m.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 65 81
file work_power_fig5.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What is the work associated with the force that the earth exerts on the
 object? Is work done by this force or against it? Is the work positive
 or negative? Show your calculations.
\layout Enumerate
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
What is the work associated with the external force you apply to the object?
 Is work done by this force or against it? Is the work positive or negative?
 Show your calculations.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Pulling at an Angle What Happens When the Force and the Displacement Are
 Not Along the Same Line? 
\layout Standard

Let's be more quantitative about measuring force and distance and calculating
 the work.
 How should work be calculated when the external force and the displacement
 of an object are not in the same direction?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 361 61
file work_power_fig6.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

To investigate this, you will use a spring scale to measure the force necessary
 to slide a block along the table at a constant speed.
 Before you make your simple force measurements, you should put some weights
 on your block so that it slides along a smooth surface at a constant velocity
 even when it is being pulled with a force that is 45 degrees from the horizonta
l.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: Calculating Work
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Hold a spring scale horizontal to the table and use it to pull the block
 a distance of 0.5 meters along the horizontal surface in such a way that
 the block moves at a constant speed.
 Record the force in newtons and the distance in meters in the space below
 and calculate the work done on the block in joules.
 (Note that there is a special unit for work the joule or J for short.
 One joule is equal to one newton times one meter, i.e.
 J = N.m)
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Repeat the measurement, only this time pull on the block at a 45
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{\circ } \)
\end_inset 

 angle with respect to the horizontal.
 Pull the block at about the same speed.
 Is the force needed larger or smaller than you measured in part (a)?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(c) Assuming that the actual physical work done in part (b) is the same
 as the physical work done in part (a) above, how could you enhance the
 mathematical definition of work so that the forces measured in part (b)
 could be used to calculate work? In other words, use your data to postulate
 a mathematical equation that relates the physical work, W, to the magnitude
 of the applied force, F, the magnitude of the displacement, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

s, and the angle, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \theta  \)
\end_inset 

, between F and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

s.
 Explain your reasoning.
 Hint: sin 30
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{\circ } \)
\end_inset 

 = .500, sin 45
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{\circ } \)
\end_inset 

 = .707, cos 30
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{\circ } \)
\end_inset 

 = .865, cos 45
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{\circ } \)
\end_inset 

 = .707.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Work as a Dot Product 
\layout Standard

Review the definition of dot (or scalar) product as a special product of
 two vectors in your textbook, and convince yourself that the dot product
 can be used to define physical work in general cases when the force is
 constant but not necessarily in the direction of the displacement resulting
 from it.
 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
W=\overrightarrow{F}\bullet \overrightarrow{s}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 5: How Much Work Goes with Each Job? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(a) Re-examine the descriptions of the jobs shown in the figure on the first
 page of this section.
 What is the minimum physical work done in job 1?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(b) What is the minimum physical work done in job 2?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(c) What is the minimum physical work is done in job 3?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Was your original intuition about which job to take correct? Which job
 should Richmond Load 'n' Go try to land?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
The Concept of Power
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

People are interested in more than physical work.
 They are also interested in the rate at which physical work can be done.
 Average power, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\langle P\right\rangle  \)
\end_inset 

, is defined as the ratio of the amount of work done, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

W, to the time interval, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

t, it takes to do the work, so that
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\left\langle P\right\rangle =\frac{\Delta W}{\Delta t}.\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Instantaneous power is given by the derivative of work with respect to time,
 or
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
P=\frac{dW}{dt}.\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

If work is measured in joules and time in seconds then the fundamental unit
 of power is in joules/second where 1 joule/second equals one watt.
 However, a more traditional unit of power is the horsepower, which represents
 the rate at which a typical work horse can do physical work.
 It turns out that 
\shape italic 
1 horsepower (or hp) = 746 watts = 746 joules/second
\shape default 
.
\layout Standard

Those of you who are car buffs know that horsepower is a big deal in rating
 high performance cars.
 The hp in a souped-up car is in the hundreds.
 How does your stair climbing ability stack up? Let's see how long it takes
 you to climb the three stories of stairs in the science center.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 6: Rate the Horsepower in Your Legs
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(a) Determine the time it takes you to climb the three flights of stairs
 in the science center.
 Then measure the height of the climb and compute the work done against
 the force of gravity.
\layout Standard

(b) Compute the average power, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\langle P\right\rangle  \)
\end_inset 

, you expended in hp.
 How does this compare to the horsepower of your favorite automobile? If
 you're not into cars, how do you stack up against a horse?
\the_end
