#This file was created by <vineyard> Wed Jul  5 09:54:53 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Measurement Uncertainty and Variation
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives 
\layout Itemize

To explore the mathematical meaning of the standard deviation and standard
 error associated with a set of measurements.
 
\layout Itemize

To investigate random and systematic variations associated with a set of
 measurements.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Statistics - The Inevitability of Uncertainty 
\layout Standard

With care and attention, it is commonly believed that both mistakes and
 systematic errors can be eliminated completely.
 However, inherent uncertainties do not result from mistakes or errors.
 Instead, they can be attributed in part to the impossibility of building
 measuring equipment that is precise to an infinite number of significant
 figures.
 The ruler provides us with an example of this.
 It can be made better and better, but it always has an ultimate limit of
 precision.
\layout Standard

Another cause of inherent uncertainties is the large number of random variations
 affecting any phenomenon being studied.
 For instance, if you repeatedly drop a baseball from the level of the lab
 table and measure the time of each fall, the measurements will most probably
 not all be the same.
 Even if the stop watch was gated electronically so as to be as precise
 as possible, there would be small fluctuations in the flow of currents
 through the circuits as a result of random thermal motion of atoms and
 molecules that make up the wires and circuit elements.
 This could change the stop watch reading from measurement to measurement.
 The sweaty palm of the experimenter could cause the ball to stick to the
 hand for an extra fraction of a second, slight air currents in the room
 could change the ball's time of fall, vibrations could cause the floor
 to oscillate up and down an imperceptible distance, and so on.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Repeated Time-of-Fall Data
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

In the first two activities, you and your partners will take repeated data
 on the time of fall of a ball and study how the data varies from some average
 value for the time-of-fall.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

A ball 
\layout Itemize

A stop watch 
\layout Itemize

A 2-meter stick
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Timing a Falling Ball
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 50mm 
(a) Drop the ball so it falls through a height of exactly 2.0 m at least
 20 times in rapid succession and measure the time of fall.
 Be as exact as possible about the height from which you drop the ball.
 Record the data in a table below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Enter your data as a single column in Cricket Graph and run single column
 statistics on the data.
 See Appendix C for instructions.
 Report the average (mean) value in the space below.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
The Standard Deviation as a Measure of Uncertainty 
\layout Standard

How certain are we that the average fall-time determined in the previous
 activity is accurate? The average of a number of measurements does not
 tell the whole story.
 If all the times you measured were the same, the average would seem to
 be very precise.
 If each of the measurements varied from the others by a large amount, we
 would be less certain of the meaning of the average time.
 We need criteria for determining the certainty of our data.
 Statisticians often use a quantity called the standard deviation as a measure
 of the level of uncertainty in data.
 The standard deviation is usually represented by the Greek letter 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

 (sigma).
 A customary way of expressing an experimentally determined value is: Mean
 ± 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

.
 The formal mathematical definition of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

 can be found in Appendix A.
\layout Standard

In the next activity you will use Cricket Graph (see Appendix C) to calculate
 the value of the standard deviation for the repeated fall-time data you
 just obtained and explore how the standard deviation is related to variation
 in your data.
 In particular, you will try to answer this question: What percentage of
 your data lies within one standard deviation of the average you calculated?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Standard Deviation
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Report the value for the standard deviation of your data in the space
 below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Calculate the average plus the standard deviation, <t> + 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

, and the average minus the standard deviation, <t> - 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

, and record the results in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(c) Determine the number of your data points that lie within ±
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

 of the average and write the result in the space below.
 Also, calculate the percentage of data points lying within a standard deviation
 of the average and report that result.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 50mm 
(d) Combine your results with those obtained by the other groups in the
 class and create a table in the space below with the following column headings:
 Lab Station, <t> (s), 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

 (s), %Data ± 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Study the last column, which represents the percentage of data points
 lying within one standard deviation of the average.
 What does the standard deviation, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

, tell you about the approximate probability that another measurement will
 lie within ±
\begin_inset Formula \( \sigma  \)
\end_inset 

 of the average?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Systematic Error - How About the Accuracy of Your Timing Device and Timing
 Methods?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

As the result of problems with your measuring instrument or the procedures
 you are using, each of your measurements may tend to be consistently too
 high or too low.
 If this is the case, you probably have a source of systematic error.
 There are several types of systematic error.
\layout Standard

Most of us have set a watch or clock only to see it gain or lose a certain
 amount of time each day or week.
 In ordinary language we would say that such a time keeping device is inaccurate.
 In scientific terms, we would say that it is subject to systematic error.
 In the case of a stopwatch or digital timer that doesn't run continuously
 like a clock, we have to ask an additional set of questions.
 Does it start up immediately? Does it stop exactly when the event is over?
 Is there some delay in the start and stop time? A delay in starting or
 stopping a timer could also cause systematic error.
\layout Standard

Finally, systematic error can be present as a result of the methods you
 and your partner are using for making the measurement.
 For example, are you starting the timer exactly at the beginning of the
 event being measured and stopping it exactly at the end? Are you dropping
 the ball from a little above the exact starting point each time? A little
 below?
\layout Standard

It is possible to correct for systematic error if you can quantify it.
 Suppose that God, who is a theoretical physicist, said that the distance
 in meters, y, that a ball falls after a time of t seconds near the earth's
 surface in most places is given by the equation
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
y=\frac{1}{2}gt^{2}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

where g is the gravitational constant (equal to 9.8 m/s/s).
 (In this idealized equation the effects of air resistance have been neglected.)
\layout Standard

Does the theoretical value for the time-of-fall lie within the standard
 error of your average measured value? In the activity that follows, you
 should compare your average time-of-fall with that expected by theory to
 determine if a systematic error exists.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Is There Systematic Error in the Data? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Calculate the theoretical, God given, time-of-fall in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Does the theoretical value lie in the range of your own average value
 with its associated uncertainty? If not, you probably have a source of
 systematic error.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(c) If you seem to have systematic error, explain whether the measured times
 tend to be too short or too long and list some of the possible causes of
 it in the space below.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Homework
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
1.
 Suppose you made the following five length measurements of the width of
 a piece of 8 1/2" X 11" paper which has been cut carefully by a manufacturer
 using an unfamiliar centimeter rule: 21.33 cm, 21.52 cm, 21.47.
 cm, 21.21 cm, 21.45 cm.
 (a) Find the mean and standard deviation of the measurements.
 The formal mathematical definition of s is given in Appendix A.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Is there any evidence of uncertainty in the measurements or are they
 precise? Explain.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Is there any evidence of systematic error in the measurements? If so,
 what might cause this? Explain.
\layout Standard

2.
 Suppose Ashley and Ryan each throw darts at targets as shown below.
 Each of them is trying very hard to hit the bulls eye each time.
 Discuss in essay form which of the two students has the least uncertainty
 associated with his or her throws and is thus more precise.
 Is one of the students less accurate is the sense of having a systematic
 error associated with his or her throws? What factors like eyesight and
 coordination might cause one to be more precise and another more accurate?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 348 169
file measurement_uncertainty_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\the_end
