#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 10 15:35:48 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\float_placement h
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Momentum and Momentum Change
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

To understand the definition of momentum and its vector nature as it applies
 to one- dimensional collisions.
 
\layout Itemize

To reformulate Newton's second law in terms of change in momentum, using
 the fact that Newton's "motion" is what we refer to as momentum.
 
\layout Itemize

To develop the concept of impulse to explain how forces act over time when
 an object undergoes a collision.
 
\layout Itemize

To use Newton's second law to develop a mathematical equation relating impulse
 and momentum change for any object experiencing a force.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Overview 
\layout Standard

In the next few units we will explore the forces of interaction between
 two or more objects and study the changes in motion that result from these
 interactions.
 We are especially interested in studying collisions and explosions in which
 interactions take place in fractions of a second or less.
 Early investigators spent a considerable amount of time trying to observe
 collisions and explosions, but they encountered difficulties.
 This is not surprising, since the observation of the details of such phenomena
 requires the use of instrumentation that was not yet invented (such as
 the high speed camera).
 However, the principles of the outcomes of collisions were well understood
 by the late seventeenth century, when several leading European scientists
 (including Sir Isaac Newton) developed the concept of quantity -of-motion
 to describe both elastic collisions (in which objects bounce off each other)
 and inelastic collisions (in which objects stick together).
 These days we use the word momentum rather than motion in describing collisions
 and explosions.
\layout Standard

We will begin our study of collisions by exploring the relationship between
 the forces experienced by an object and its momentum change.
 It can be shown mathematically from Newton's laws and experimentally from
 our own observations that the integral of force experienced by an object
 over time is equal to its change in momentum.
 This time-integral of force is defined as a special quantity called impulse,
 and the statement of equality between impulse and momentum change is known
 as the impulse momentum theorem.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

Dynamics carts (2) and track
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Defining Momentum 
\layout Standard

In this session we are going to develop the concept of momentum to predict
 the outcome of collisions.
 But you don't officially know what momentum is because we haven't defined
 it yet.
 Lets start by predicting what will happen as a result of a simple one-dimension
al collision.
 This should help you figure out how to define momentum to enable you to
 describe collisions in mathematical terms.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 361 110
file momentum_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

It's early fall and you are driving along a two lane highway in a rented
 moving van.
 It is full of all of your possessions so you and the loaded truck were
 weighed in at 8000 lbs.
 You have just slowed down to 15 MPH because you're in a school zone.
 It's a good thing you thought to do that because a group of first graders
 is just starting to cross the road.
 Just as you pass the children you see a 2000 lb sports car in the oncoming
 lane heading straight for the children at about 80 MPH.
 What a fool the driver is! A desperate thought crosses your mind.
 You figure that you just have time to swing into the oncoming lane and
 speed up a bit before making a head-on collision with the sports car.
 You want your truck and the sports car to crumple into a heap that sticks
 together and doesn't move.
 Can you save the children or is this just a suicidal act? For simulated
 observations of this situation you can use two carts of different masses
 set up to stick together in trial collisions.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Can You Stop the Car?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Predict how fast you would have to be going to completely stop the sports
 car.
 Explain the reasons for your prediction.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Try some head on collisions with the carts of different masses to simulate
 the event.
 Describe some of your observations.
 What happens when the less massive cart is moving much faster than the
 more massive cart? Much slower? At about the same speed?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Based on your intuitive answers in parts (a) and (b) and your observations,
 what mathematical definition might you use to describe the momentum (or
 motion) you would need to stop an oncoming vehicle traveling with a known
 mass and velocity?
\layout Standard

Just to double check your reasoning, you should have come to the conclusion
 that momentum is defined by the vector equation
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\overrightarrow{p}=m\overrightarrow{v}.\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Expressing Newton's Second Law Using Momentum 
\layout Standard

Originally Newton did not use the concept of acceleration or velocity in
 his laws.
 Instead he used the term "motion", which he defined as the product of mass
 and velocity (a quantity we now call momentum).
 Let's examine a translation from Latin of Newton's first two laws (with
 some parenthetical changes for clarity).
\layout Standard


\shape italic 
Newton's First Two Laws of Motion
\layout Enumerate


\shape italic 
Every body continues in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a right
 line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces impressed on
 it.
 
\layout Enumerate


\shape italic 
The (rate of) change of motion is proportional to the motive force impressed:
 and is made in the direction in which that force is impressed.
\layout Standard

The more familiar contemporary statement of the second law is that the net
 force on an object is the product of its mass and its acceleration where
 the direction of the force and of the resulting acceleration are the same.
 Newton's statement of the law and the more modern statement are mathematically
 equivalent, as you will show.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Re-expressing Newton's Second Law
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Write down the contemporary mathematical expression for Newton's second
 law relating net force to mass and acceleration.
 Please use vector signs and a summation sign where appropriate.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Write down the definition of instantaneous acceleration in terms of
 the rate of change of velocity.
 Again, use vector signs.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) It can be shown that if an object has a changing velocity and a constant
 mass then 
\begin_inset Formula \( m\frac{d\overrightarrow{v}}{dt}=\frac{d\left( m\overrightarrow{v}\right) }{dt} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Explain why.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Show that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Sigma \overrightarrow{F}=m\overrightarrow{a}=\frac{d\overrightarrow{p}}{dt} \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Explain in detail why Newton's statement of the second law and the mathemati
cal expression 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Sigma \overrightarrow{F}=\frac{d\overrightarrow{p}}{dt} \)
\end_inset 

 are two representations of the same statement, i.e.
 are logically equivalent.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Momentum Change and Collision Forces
\series default 
 
\layout Standard


\shape italic 
What's Your Intuition?
\shape default 
 
\layout Standard

You are sleeping in your sister's room while she is away at college.
 Your house is on fire and smoke is pouring into the partially open bedroom
 door.
 The room is so messy that you cannot get to the door.
 The only way to close the door is to throw either a blob of clay or a super
 ball at the door there's not enough time to throw both.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: What Packs the Biggest Wallop-A Clay Blob or a Super ball? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Assuming that the clay blob and the super ball have the same mass, which
 would you throw to close the door the clay blob (which will stick to the
 door) or the super ball (which will bounce back with almost the same velocity
 it had before it collided with the door)? Give reasons for your choice,
 using any notions you already have or any new concepts developed in physics
 such as force, momentum, Newton's laws, etc.
 Remember, your life depends on it!
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Momentum Changes
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

It would be nice to be able to use Newton's formulation of the second law
 of motion to find collision forces, but it is difficult to measure the
 rate of change of momentum during a rapid collision without special instruments.
 However, measuring the momenta of objects just before and just after a
 collision is usually not too difficult.
 This led scientists in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to concentrate
 on the overall changes in momentum that resulted from collisions.
 They then tried to relate changes in momentum to the forces experienced
 by an object during a collision.
 In the next activity you are going to explore the mathematics of calculating
 momentum changes.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: Predicting Momentum Changes 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
Which object undergoes the most momentum change during the collision with
 a door the clay blob or the super ball? Explain your reasoning carefully.
\layout Standard

Let's check your reasoning with some formal calculations of the momentum
 changes for both inelastic and elastic collisions.
 This is a good review of the properties of one-dimensional vectors.
 Recall that momentum is defined as a vector quantity that has both magnitude
 and direction.
 Mathematically, momentum change is given by the equation
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\Delta \overrightarrow{p}=\overrightarrow{p_{f}}-\overrightarrow{p_{i}}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

where 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{p_{i}} \)
\end_inset 

 is the initial momentum of the object just before and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{p_{f}} \)
\end_inset 

 is its final momentum just after a collision.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 5: Calculating 1D Momentum Changes
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) Suppose a dead ball (or clay blob) is dropped on a table and "sticks"
 in such a way that it has an initial momentum just before it hits of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{p_{i}}=-p_{iy}\widehat{j} \)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \( \widehat{j} \)
\end_inset 

 is a unit vector pointing along the positive y axis.
 Express the final momentum of the dead ball in the same vector notation.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) What is the change in momentum of the clay blob as a result of its collision
 with the table? Use the same type of unit vector notation to express your
 answer.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(c) Suppose that a live ball (or a super ball) is dropped on a table and
 "bounces" on the table in an elastic collision so that its speed just before
 and just after the bounce are the same.
 Also suppose that just before it bounces it has an initial momentum 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{p_{i}}=-p_{iy}\widehat{j} \)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \( \widehat{j} \)
\end_inset 

 is a unit vector pointing along the positive y-axis.
 What is the final momentum of the ball in the same vector notation? Hint:
 Does the final 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{p} \)
\end_inset 

 vector point along the +y or y axis? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(d) What is the change in momentum of the ball as a result of the collision?
 Use the same type of unit vector notation to express your result.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) The answer is not zero.
 Why? How does this result compare with your prediction? Discuss this situation.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(f) Suppose the mass of each ball is 0.2 kg and that they are dropped from
 1 m above the table.
 Using this value for mass of the balls and a calculated value for the velocity
 of each of the balls just before they hit the table, you can calculate
 the momentum just before the collision 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{p_{i}} \)
\end_inset 

 for each of the balls.
 Also calculate the momentum of the balls just after the collision 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{p_{f}} \)
\end_inset 

 and the change in momentum 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta \overrightarrow{p} \)
\end_inset 

 for each ball.
 Show your calculations in the space below.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Applying Newton's Second Law to the Collision Process (The Egg Toss)
\layout Standard

Suppose somebody tosses you a raw egg and you catch it.
 In physics jargon, one would say (in a very official tone of voice) that
 "the egg and the hand have undergone an inelastic collision." What is the
 relationship between the force you have to exert on the egg to stop it,
 the time it takes you to stop it, and the momentum change that the egg
 experiences? You ought to have some intuition about this matter.
 In more ordinary language, would you catch an egg slowly or fast?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 6: Momentum Changes and Average Forces on an Egg: What's Your Intuition
?
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(a) If you catch an egg of mass m that is heading toward your hand at speed
 v what is the magnitude of the momentum change that it undergoes?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Does the total momentum change differ if you catch the egg more slowly
 or is it the same?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Suppose the time you take to bring the egg to a stop is 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

t.
 Would you rather catch the egg in such a way that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

t is small or large.
 Why?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) What do you suspect might happen to the average force you exert on the
 egg while catching it when 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

t is small?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 380 172
file momentum_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

You can use Newton's second law to derive a mathematical relationship between
 momentum change, force, and collision times for objects.
 This derivation leads to the impulse- momentum theorem.
 Let's apply Newton's second law to the egg catching scenario.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 7: Force and Momentum Change 
\layout Standard

(a) Sketch an arrow representing the magnitude and direction of the force
 exerted by your hand on the egg as you catch it.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 68 58
file momentum_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Write the mathematical expression for Newton's second law in terms of
 the net force and the time rate of change of momentum.
 (See Activity 2(e) for details.)
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Explain why, if 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{F} \)
\end_inset 

 is a constant during the collision lasting a time 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta  \)
\end_inset 

t , then 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{d\overrightarrow{p}}{dt}=\frac{\Delta \overrightarrow{p}}{\Delta t} \)
\end_inset 

.
 
\layout Standard

(d) Show that for a constant force 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{F} \)
\end_inset 

 the change in momentum is given by 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta \overrightarrow{p}=\overrightarrow{F}\Delta t \)
\end_inset 

.
 Note that for a constant force, the term 
\begin_inset Formula \( \overrightarrow{F}\Delta t \)
\end_inset 

 is known as the impulse given to one body by another.
\the_end
