#This file was created by <vineyard> Mon Jul 10 14:40:06 2000
#LyX 1.0 (C) 1995-1999 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Changing Motion
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

1990-93 Dept.
 of Physics and Astronomy, Dickinson College.
 Supported by FIPSE (U.S.
 Dept.
 of Ed.) and NSF.
 Portions of this material may have been modified locally and may not have
 been classroom tested at Dickinson College.
\end_float 
\layout Standard

Name 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Section 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\latex default 

\hfill 
Date 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{1.0in}{0.1pt}
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Objectives
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize

To learn how to relate graphs of acceleration vs.
 time to the motions they represent.
 
\layout Itemize

To understand the relationship between position vs.
 time, velocity vs.
 time, and acceleration vs.
 time graphs.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Velocity and Acceleration Graphs
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

We are interested in having you learn to describe simple motions in which
 the velocity of an object is changing.
 In order to learn to describe motion in more detail for some simple situations,
 you will be asked to observe and describe the motion of a dynamics cart
 on a track.
 Although graphs and words are still important representations of these
 motions, you will also be asked to draw velocity vectors, arrows that indicate
 both the direction and speed of a moving object.
 Thus, you will also learn how to represent simple motions with velocity
 diagrams .
\layout Standard

In the last session, you looked at position vs.
 time and velocity vs.
 time graphs of the motion of your body as you moved at a "constant" velocity.
 The data for the graphs were collected using a motion detector.
 Your goal in this session is to learn how to describe various kinds of
 motion in more detail.
 It is not enough when studying motion in physics to simply say that "the
 object is moving toward the right" or "it is standing still." You have probably
 realized that a velocity vs.
 time graph is better than a position vs.
 time graph when you want to know how fast and in what direction you are
 moving at each instant in time as you walk.
 When the velocity of an object is changing, it is also important to know
 how it is changing.
 The rate of change of velocity is known as the acceleration.
 
\layout Standard

In order to get a feeling for acceleration, it is helpful to create and
 learn to interpret velocity vs.
 time and acceleration vs.
 time graphs for some relatively simple motions of a cart on a track.
 You will be observing the cart with the motion detector as it moves at
 a constant velocity and as it changes its velocity at a constant rate.
 Use the 
\series bold 
P, V & A Graphs
\series default 
 application in the 
\series bold 
131 Workshop
\series default 
 submenu of the 
\series bold 
Apple
\series default 
 menu for all of the activities in this unit.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Apparatus
\series default 
 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
Science Workshop 750 Interface
\layout Itemize

Ultrasonic motion detector 
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
DataStudio
\shape default 
 software (P, V & A Graphs application)
\layout Itemize

Dynamics cart and track 
\layout Itemize

Lab stand to incline the track 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Graphing a Constant Velocity Cart Motion 
\layout Standard

Let's start by giving the cart a push along the level track and graphing
 its motion.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 1: Position, Velocity and Acceleration Graphs of Constant Velocity
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Based on your observations of the motions of your body in the last session,
 how should the position and velocity graphs look if you move the cart at
 a constant velocity away from the motion detector starting at the 0.5 meter
 mark? Sketch your predictions with dashed lines on the axes that follow.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 415 375
file changing_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(b) Acceleration is defined as the time rate of change of velocity.
 Sketch your prediction of the cart acceleration on the axes that follow
 using a dashed line.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 415 195
file changing_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(c) Test your prediction.
 Be sure that the cart is never closer than 0.15 meter from the motion detector.
 Try several times until you get a fairly constant velocity.
 Sketch your results with solid lines on the axes shown above.
 The acceleration vs.
 time graphs will exhibit small fluctuations due to irregularities in the
 motion of the cart.
 You should ignore these fluctuations and draw smooth patterns.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Did your graphs agree with your predictions? What characterizes constant
 velocity motion on a position vs.
 time graph? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(e) What characterizes constant velocity motion on a velocity vs.
 time graph?
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(f) What characterizes constant velocity motion on a acceleration vs.
 time graph?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Finding Accelerations
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

To find the average acceleration of the cart during some time interval (the
 average time rate of change of its velocity), you must measure its velocity
 at two different times, calculate the difference between the final value
 and the initial value and divide by the time interval.
\layout Standard

To find the acceleration vector from two velocity vectors, you must first
 find the vector representing the change in velocity by subtracting the
 initial velocity vector from the final one.
 Then you divide this vector by the time interval.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 2: Representing Acceleration
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(a) Does the acceleration vs.
 time graph you observed agree with this method of calculating acceleration?
 Explain.
 Does it agree with your prediction?
\layout Standard

(b) The diagram below shows the positions of the cart at equal time intervals.
 (This is like taking snapshots of the cart at equal time intervals.) At
 each indicated time, sketch a vector above the cart which might represent
 the velocity of the cart at that time while it is moving at a constant
 velocity away from the motion detector.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 418 106
file changing_fig3.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(c) Explain how you would find the vector representing the change in velocity
 between the times 1.0 s and 2.0 s in the diagram above.
 From this vector, what value would you calculate for the acceleration?
 Explain.
 Is this value in agreement with the acceleration graph you obtained in
 Activity 1?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Speeding Up at a Moderate Rate
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

In the next activity you will look at velocity and acceleration graphs of
 the motion of a cart when its velocity is changing.
 You will be able to see how these two representations of the motion are
 related to each other when the cart is speeding up.
\layout Standard

In order to get your cart speeding up smoothly use the lab stand to raise
 the track approximately one-third the height of the lab stand at the end
 where the motion detector is mounted.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 3: Graphs Depicting Speeding Up
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Predict the shape of the position, velocity, and acceleration vs.
 time graphs for the cart moving away from the sensor and speeding up.
 Sketch your predictions on the following axes using dashed lines.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 415 375
file changing_fig1.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 415 195
file changing_fig2.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(b) Create graphs of the motion of your cart as it moves away from the detector
 and speeds up.
 Sketch the graphs neatly on the above axes using solid lines.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
(c) How does your position graph differ from the position graphs for steady
 (constant velocity) motion? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
(d) What feature of your velocity graph signifies that the motion was away
 from the detector? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
(e) What feature of your velocity graph signifies that the cart was speeding
 up? How would a graph of motion with a constant velocity differ? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
(f) During the time that the cart is speeding up, is the acceleration positive
 or negative? How does speeding up while moving away from the detector result
 in this sign of acceleration? Hint: Remember that acceleration is the rate
 of change of velocity.
 Look at how the velocity is changing.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
(g) How does the velocity vary in time as the cart speeds up? Does it increase
 at a steady rate or in some other way? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 15mm 
(h) How does the acceleration vary in time as the cart speeds up? Is this
 what you expect based on the velocity graph? Explain.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Using Vectors to Describe the Acceleration
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Let's return to the Vector Diagram representation and use it to describe
 the acceleration.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 4: Acceleration Vectors
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) The diagram that follows shows the positions of the cart at equal time
 intervals.
 At each indicated time, sketch a vector above the cart which might represent
 the velocity of the cart at that time while it is moving away from the
 motion detector and speeding up.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 418 106
file changing_fig4.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(b) Show below how you would find the approximate length and direction of
 the vector representing the change in velocity between the times 1.0 s and
 2.0 s using the diagram above.
 No quantitative calculations are needed.
 Based on the direction of this vector and the direction of the positive
 x-axis, what is the sign of the acceleration? Does this agree with your
 answer to Activity 3 (f)?
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Measuring Acceleration 
\layout Standard

In this investigation you will analyze the motion of your accelerated cart
 quantitatively.
 This analysis will be quantitative in the sense that your results will
 consist of numbers.
 You will determine the cart's acceleration from the slope of your velocity
 vs.
 time graph and compare it to the average acceleration read from the acceleratio
n vs.
 time graph.
 You can display actual values for your acceleration and velocity data using
 the Smart Tool on the graph window menu.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 5: Calculating Accelerations
\series default 
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 30mm 
(a) List 10 of the typical accelerations of the cart measured in Activity
 3.
 Use the Smart Tool on the Acceleration vs.
 Time graph to get these values.
 (Only use values from the portion of the graph after the cart was released
 and before you stopped it.)
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
(b) Calculate the average value of the acceleration and record it below.
 
\layout Standard

(c) The average acceleration during a particular time period is defined
 as the change in velocity divided by the change in time.
 This is the average rate of change of velocity.
 By definition, the rate of change of a quantity graphed with respect to
 time is also the slope of the curve.
 Thus the (average) slope of an object's velocity vs.
 time graph is the (average) acceleration of the object.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 10mm 
Use the Smart Tool to read the velocity and time coordinates for two typical
 points on the velocity graph.
 For a more accurate answer, use two points as far apart in time as possible
 but still during the time the cart was speeding up.
 Record the points in the space below.
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Calculate the change in velocity between points 1 and 2.
 Also calculate the corresponding change in time (time interval).
 Divide the change in velocity by the change in time.
 This is the average acceleration.
 Show and then summarize your calculations below.
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) Is the acceleration positive or negative? Is this what you expected?
 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(f) Does the average acceleration you just calculated agree with the average
 acceleration you calculated from the acceleration graph? Do you expect
 them to agree? How would you account for any differences? 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Speeding Up at a Faster Rate
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

Suppose that you accelerate your cart at a faster rate by raising the track
 to approximately two-thirds the height of the lab stand.
 How would your velocity and acceleration graphs change? 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Activity 6: Calculating Accelerations
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

(a) Resketch the velocity and acceleration graphs you found in Activity
 3 using the axes that follow.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 271 371
file changing_fig5.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(b) In the previous set of axes, use a dashed line or another color to sketch
 your predictions for the general graphs that depict a cart speeding up
 at a faster rate.
 Exact predictions are not expected.
 We just want to know how you think the general shapes of the graphs will
 change.
\layout Standard

(c) Test your predictions by accelerating the cart with the track raised
 to approximately two-thirds the height of the lab stand.
 Repeat if necessary to get nice graphs and then sketch the results in the
 axes that follow.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 271 371
file changing_fig5.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(d) Did the general shapes of your velocity and acceleration graphs agree
 with your predictions? How is the greater magnitude (size) of acceleration
 represented on a velocity vs.
 time graph? 
\layout Standard
\added_space_bottom 20mm 
(e) How is the greater magnitude (size) of acceleration represented on an
 acceleration vs.
 time graph? 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Homework
\series default 
 
\layout Standard

1.
 An object moving along a line (the + position axis) has the acceleration-time
 graph shown below.
 Describe how might the object move to create this graph if it is moving
 away from the origin?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align left 

\begin_inset Figure size 214 100
file changing_fig6.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

2.
 Sketch on the axes below a velocity-time graph that goes with the above
 acceleration-time graph.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 214 100
file changing_fig7.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

3.
 For each of the velocity-time graphs below, sketch the shape of the acceleratio
n-time graph that goes with it.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 214 208
file changing_fig8.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 214 208
file changing_fig9.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

4.
 The following is a velocity-time graph for a car.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 214 103
file changing_fig10.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

What is the average acceleration of the car? Show your work below.
\layout Standard

5.
 Which position-time graph below could be that for a cart that is steadily
 accelerating away from the origin?
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 436 121
file changing_fig11.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

A car can move along a line (the + position axis).
 Sketch velocity-time and acceleration-time graphs which correspond to each
 of the following descriptions of the car's motion.
\layout Standard

6.
 The car starts from rest and moves away from the origin increasing its
 speed at a steady rate.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 234 228
file changing_fig12.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

7.
 The car is moving away from the origin at a constant velocity.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 234 228
file changing_fig12.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

8.
 The car starts from rest and moves away from the origin increasing its
 speed at a steady rate twice as large as in (6) above.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 234 228
file changing_fig12.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

9.
 The car is moving away from the origin at a constant velocity twice as
 large as in (7) above.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 234 228
file changing_fig12.eps
flags 9

\end_inset 


\the_end
